Appellants:Muthu Naicker and Ors.

vs.

Respondent:State of Tamil Nadu





JUDGMENT

1. These three appeals arise out of the judgment rendered by a  Division  Bench of the  High  Court of  Madras in
Criminal Appeal No. 295 of 1970 convicting 27 appellants for different offences who were acquitted of all charges
leveled  against  them  by  the  learned  Sessions  Judge,  Chingleput  Division  in  Sessions  Case  No.  25  of  1969  in
which  28  persons  were  put  up  for  trial  for  various  offences  Including  the  one  under  Section  302  read  with
Section 34, I.P.C. against accused Nos. 1 to 10, 16, 17, 19 and 20, and under Section 302 read with Section 149,
I.P.C.  against  rest  of  the  accused  and  3  other  charges  for  specific  offences  under  Sections  323,  324,  325  read
with  Section  149  and  Section  427  read  with  Section  34,  I.P.C.  The  learned  Sessions  Judge  entertained  a
reasonable  doubt  about  the  veracity  of  the  prosecution  evidence  and  giving  benefit  of  doubt,  rejected  the
prosecution case in its entirety and acquitted all the accused. The State of Tamil Nadu preferred an appeal to the
High  Court  of  Madras  against  original  accused  Nos.  1  to  27.  No  appeal  was  preferred  against  the  acquittal  of
original accused No. 28 and it has become final. The High Court practically accepted the entire prosecution case
and convicted accused Nos. 1 to 27, i.e. all the accused in respect of whom the State had preferred an appeal,
and  sentenced  them  to  varying  terms  of  Imprisonment  on  different  counts.  Original  accused  Nos.  1-7  and  19
were convicted amongst others, for an offence under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the I.P.C. and each of
them was sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life. These 8 accused preferred Criminal Appeal No, 230 of 1972
under  Section  2(a)  of  the  Supreme  Court  (Enlargement  of  Criminal  Appellate  Jurisdiction)  Act,  1970",  Original
accused  Nos. 8 to 18 and 20 to 27 applied for and obtained special leave in  Criminal  Appeal  No. 238 of 1972.
Original  accused  Nos.  1  to  7  and  19  were  also  convicted  for  various  other  offences  and  in  respect  of  their
convictions for offences other than the one under Section 302 read with Section 34, I.P.C. they applied for and
obtained  special  leave  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.  97  of  1973.  Thus,  these  three  appeals  arise  from  the  same
Judgment and accordingly were heard together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.

2. A curious feature of this case which has caused us not inconsiderable anxiety is that in all 28 persons were
challenged before the learned Sessions Judge who framed charges against the accused under 39 different heads.
The prosecution in all examined 34 witnesses including prosecution witnesses Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 13 who
are  alleged  to  have  suffered  injuries  at  the  scene  of  occurrence  and  in  all  probability  in  the  course  of  the
occurrence, and yet the learned Sessions Judge was not impressed by the evidence of any of these witnesses and
rejected  the  entire  prosecution  case  as  unworthy  of  belief  and  acquitted  all  the  accused.  When  the  matter  was
taken to the High Court by the State against all accused, except the last, the High Court was of the opinion that
the appreciation of evidence by the learned Sessions Judge has been "so unreasonable that the evidence given by
the witnesses was discarded only on the ground that it is the evidence of partisan, witnesses and the judgment of
the trial court is vitiated by incoherent and heterogeneous medley of confused thinking, clarity and cogency being
foreign  to  the  judgment  of  the  trial  Court",  With  this  cryptic  observation  the  High  Court  accepted  almost  the
entire prosecution case except where a concession was made by the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the
State and convicted all the appellants, viz., original accused Nos. 1 to 27 for various offences. Accused Nos. 1 to
7  and  19  were  convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section  302  read  with  Section  34,  I.P.C.  and  each  of  them  was
sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life. Accused Nos. 1, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12 to 15, 19, 20 22, 23, 26 and 27 were
convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section  147,  I.P.C.  and  the  remaining  accused  were  convicted  for  an  offence
under Section 148, I.P.C. Accused Nos. 7, 17, 21 and 29 were convicted for an offence under Section 323, I.P.C.
Accused Nos. 7, 11, 13, 23 and 25 were convicted for an offence under Section 324, I.P.C. Accused No. 19 was
convicted for an offence under Section 325, I.P.C. and all the accused were convicted with the aid of Section 149,
I.P.C.  for  the  aforementioned  offences.  Some  of  the  accused  were  also  convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section
427  read  with  Section  34,  I.P.C.  They  were  awarded  varying  sentences  on  each  count  simultaneously  directing


that the substantive sentences would run concurrently.

3. Karpakkam village was no exception to the ordinary faction ridden rural community, the dispute vivisecting the
village  community  dating  back  to  1956  when  accused  No.  11  Kuppu  Naicker  who  has  a  well  in  land  bearing
Survey  No.  102,  wanted  to  lay  a  pipe-line  to  take  water  to  the  field  bearing  No.  186/2  belonging  to  his  wife,
Dhanammal.  There  was  another  well  sunk  by  the  local  Panchayat  in  Survey  No.  170  for  the  use  of  the  village
community  and  when  accused  11  wanted  to  take  water  from  his  well  in  Survey  No.  102,  an  apprehension  was
entertained by the residents of the village that there would not be enough water in the well in  Survey  No. 170
and there would be water shortage. Gripped by this apprehension, a majority of the village community resisted
the attempt of accused 11 to take water by laying pipelines.  This became a prestige issue which led to attacks
and counter blasts. Rival parties were led by accused 11 on one side who was keen to lay the pipeline for flow of
water including through Survey No. 170 described as 'Meykal Poramboke' in which it was proposed to construct a
school  building,  and  the  opponents  were  led  by  P.W.  31.  On  March  4,  1967,  accused  24  Kumaraswami  dug  a
channel for laying the pipeline through Survey No. 170 whereupon P.W. 31 approached the Collector on March 6,
1967,  objecting  to  the  digging  of  the  channel  for  laying  pipelines  in  'Meykal  Poramboke'  and  on  his
representation  on  March  7,  1967,  the  Collector  suspended  the  permission  granted  to  accused  11  to  lay  the
pipelines.  Accused  11  and  is  companions  ignored  the  order  of  the  Collector  and  continued  to  dig  the  channel.
Apprehending that P.W. 31 and his companions may obstruct, accused 24 instituted original Suit No. 2216/67 in
the  Court  of  the  District  Munsif,  Poonanalle  against  P.  Ws.  31  and  9  others,  seeking  to  injunct  them  from
obstructing in any manner in laying the pipelines. Subsequently, the District Revenue Officer passed an order Ext.
P-5, on July 29, 1968, for laying the pipelines along the cart track in Survey Nos. 169 and 170 and the Tahsildar
was asked to demarcate the route along which the pipeline should be laid. One T. A. Thandapani, P.W. 5, at the
relevant time Revenue Divisional Officer was directed as per order Ext. P-6 to take immediate action to finalise
the  track  along  which  the  pipeline  had  to  be  laid  and  he  was  directed  to  visit  the  village  after  giving  advance
notice  to  both  the  contending  parties.  He  visited  the  village  on  11th  November  1968  when  a  written
memorandum,  Ext.  P-1  signed  by  63  residents  of  the  village,  including  P.  Ws.  1,  2,  4,  6,  7  and  deceased
Gajarajan was submitted to him objecting to laying of pipelines. He marked the track along which the line was to
be laid by the use of lime powder. A crowd collected at the spot and obstructed marking of the proposed pipeline
and  part  of  it  was  erased  as  evidenced  by  Ext.  P-20.  The  officers  then  withdrew  as  tension  was  mounting  and
P.W.  5  submitted  his  report  Ext.  P-7  dated  14th  November  1968.  The  first  outward  manifestation  of  hostility
occurred on 24th November 1968 when P.W. 31 who was returning to the village from Madras, was attacked by a
stone  hurled  at  him  by  accused  5  who  was  then  in  the  company  of  accused  1,  4  to  ?  and  1'6  to  19.  An
information was lodged with the police and P.W. 31 was taken to Royapottah Hospital where he was admitted as
indoor patient.  This incident appears to be the signal for the tragic events of  November 27, 1968.  On that day
around  2.30  p.  m.  deceased  Gajarajan,  brother  of  P.W.  31  arrived  by  bus  coming  from  Madras  side  and  was
passing through Batmi leading to Gangamal Koil on the way to his house and when he was near Casuarina Thope
a  crowd  of  about  50  to  60  persons  including  accused  1-23  and  28  emerged  from  the  Thope  and  attempted  to
waylay  the  deceased.  Deceased  Gajarajan  tried  to  escape  and  he  was  chased  and  when  he  was  near  the  well
situated near the Teachers' Quarters he was encircled by the crowd and from amongst them he was attacked and
beaten by accused 1 with a stick on his right shoulder. by accused 2 on his head with Patta knife and by accused
3 on his head with  Vettu  Kathi.  Deceased  Gajarajan took to heels and was chased by the crowd and fell down
near the house of P.W. 10 where accused 4 and 5 inflicted injuries with patta knife and accused 6 and 7 hurled
stones and accused 19 dropped a big stone on  Gajarajan.  In the incident that occurred near the house of  P.W.
10,  several  prosecution  witnesses  also  suffered  injuries  at  the  hands  of  different  accused.  It  is  alleged  that
accused 1 beat P.W. 6 and P.W. 8 with a stick; accused 2 inflicted injury with patta kathi on P.W. 6; accused 4
caused injuries with patta kathi to P. Ws. 2 and 7; accused 5 attacked P.W. 1 with spear and then hurled a stone
at  him;  accused  8  and  10  caused  grievous  hurt  to  P.W.  4;  accused  19  hurled  a  stone  at  P.W.  2  and  caused
grievous hurt; accused 23 caused hurt to P.W. 13; accused 24, 25, 26 and 27 inflicted injuries on P.W. 4. Some
of  the  accused  committed  mischief.  P.W.  32  Subramaniam,  A.S.I.  Police,  Tiruvanmyvur  received  a  telephone
message that a riot had occurred at Karpakkam Village and before he could get details on phone, the connection
was  snapped.  He  rushed  with  some  police  constables  to  the  village  simultaneously  sending  intimation  for
additional police help. When he reached near the house of P.W. 10, he found Gajarajan lying injured. P. Ws. 1, 2,
4, 6, 7 and 13 came to the house of P.W. 10. He arranged for a conveyance for taking injured Gajarajan and P.W.
4  to  the  General  Hospital  and  then  he  asked  P.  Ws.  1,  2,  6  and  7  to  accompany  him  and  at  the  police  station
recorded  First  Information  Report,  Ext.  P-2  as  narrated  by  P.W.  1  and  registered  an  offence  and  commenced
investigation.  After  completing  the  investigation  he  submitted  challan  against  28  accused  for  various  offences.
The  trial  of  the  accused  resulted  in  acquittal  and  in  appeal  by  the  State,  the  Court  reached  the  conclusion  as
hereinbefore recorded.

4. In the appreciation of evidence by the trial court as well as in appeal against acquittal of the accused by the
High  Court  there  is  very  little  or  no  meeting  ground  with  the  unfortunate  though  unavoidable  result  that  both
sides  practically  read  the  entire  evidence  before  us  and  wanted  us  to  reach  the  conclusion  on  our  own
appreciation of evidence. Undoubtedly, in respect of those accused who have been convicted for an offence under
Section 302/34, I.P.C. there is an appeal to this Court as of right, but in appeals by special leave ordinarily this
Court does not undertake to reappreciate evidence. However, in a situation in which we are placed in this case,
where  the  learned  Sessions  Judge  rejects  the  entire  prosecution  evidence  as  unworthy  of  belief,  and  the  High
Court implicitly relies on almost the entire evidence, we could not escape the duty to examine the evidence for
the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been any such error of law or fact as to vitiate the findings in the
impugned judgment.



5. Here is a case in which in all 28 accused were put up for trial and as many as 34 witnesses were examined, 6
of  whom  are  alleged  to  have  been  injured  at  the  scene  of  occurrence  and  in  all  probability  in  the  course  of
occurrence.  The  High  Court  in  one  paragraph  of  the  judgment  (para  60)  agrees  with  the  trial  Court  that  the
evidence of prosecution witnesses Nos. 10, 12 and 13 so far as they implicate accused Nos. 8, 9, 10, 16 and 17
fails  to  inspire  confidence  but  in  para  62  their  evidence  is  accepted  as  reliable  on  minor  charges  but  in  this
background we would exclude their evidence from further consideration. Even then there are 27 accused who are
before this Court and there is evidence of 31 witnesses which is to be examined.

6. Where there is a melee and a large number of assailants and number of witnesses claim to have witnessed the
occurrence from different places and at different stages of the occurrence and where the evidence as in this case
is undoubtedly partisan evidence, the distinct possibility of innocent being falsely included with guilty cannot be
easily  ruled  out.  In  a  faction  ridden  society  where  an  occurrence  takes  place  involving  rival  factions  it  is  but
inevitable that the evidence would be of a partisan nature. In such a situation to reject the entire evidence on the
sole ground that it is partisan is to shut one's eyes to the realities of the rural life in our country. Large number
of accused would go unpunished if such an easy course is charted. Simultaneously, it is to be borne in mind that
in a situation as it unfolds in the case before us, the easy tendency to involve as many persons of the opposite
faction as possible by merely naming them as having been seen in the melee is a tendency which is more often
discernible and is to be eschewed and, therefore, the evidence has to be examined with utmost care and caution.
It  is  in  such  a  situation  that  this  Court  in  Masalti  v.  State  of  U.P.  MANU/SC/0074/1964  :  [1964]8SCR133  ,
adopted the course of adopting a workable test for being assured about the role attributed to every accused. To
some extent it is inevitable that we should adopt that course.

7. Before we proceed to look into the evidence it is also necessary to make it clear that whenever in uneventful
rural society something unusual occurs, more so where the local community is faction ridden and a fight occurs
amongst  factions,  a  good  number  of  people  appear  on  the  scene  not  with  a  view  to  participating  in  the
occurrence but as curious spectators. In such an event mere presence in the unlawful assembly should not be*
treated  as  leading  to  the  conclusion  that  the  person  concerned  was  present  in  the  unlawful  assembly  as  a
member of the unlawful assembly. Vicarious liability would attach to every member of the unlawful assembly if
that member of the unlawful assembly either participates in the commission of the offence by overt act or knows
that  the  offence  which  is  committed  was  likely  to  be  committed  by  any  member  of  the  unlawful  assembly  in
prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly and becomes or continues to remain a member of
the unlawful assembly. If one becomes a member of the unlawful assembly and his association in the unlawful
assembly Is clearly established, his participation in commission of the offence by overt act is not required to be
proved  if  it  could  be  shown  that  he  knew  that  such  offence  was  likely  to  be  committed  in  prosecution  of  the
common object of the unlawful assembly.  But while finding out whether a person was a curious spectator or a
member of an unlawful assembly it is necessary to keep in mind the life in a village ordinarily uneventful except
for small squabbles where the village community is faction ridden and when a serious crime is committed people
rush just to quench their thirst to know what is happening. In this case we will have occasion to point out that
there are accused who are convicted with the aid of Section 149 I.P.C. but in respect of whom we have no doubt
in our mind that they were mere spectators and could hardly be said to be members of the unlawful assembly.

8. At the outset let us briefly analyse the charges framed against the accused. In all distinct and separate charges
were framed under 39 heads. Accused Nos. 1, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 19, 20, 22, 23, 26, 27 and 28 were charged for an
offence  committed  under  Section  147  I.P.C.  and  the  remaining  accused  were  charged  for  an  offence  under
Section 148 I.P.C. under heads 1 and 2. Accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16, 17, 19 and 20 were charged under
Section  302/34  I.P.C.  under  head  3  and  under  head  4  the  remaining  accused  were  charged  under  Section
302/149, I.P.C. Accused 1 was charged for having committed an offence under Section 323 I.P.C. under heads 5
and  7  for  causing  hurt  to  P.W.  6  Subramaniam  and  P.W.  8  Gangappa  Naicker.  Accused  2  was  charged  for
committing an offence under Section 324 I.P.C. for causing hurt to P.W. 6 Subramaniam with Patta Kathi under
head  9.  Accused  2  was  also  charged  under  head  35  for  committing  an  offence  under  Section  427  I.P.C.  for
committing mischief in the house of P.W. 7 Krishnapps Naicker. Accused 4 was charged under two distinct heads
11 and 13 for committing an offence under Section 324 I.P.C. for causing hurt with patta kathi to P.W. 2 Vedagiri
and  P.W.  7  Krishnappa  Naicker  respectively.  Accused  5  was  charged  for  committing  an  offence  under  Sections
324 and 323 I.P.C. under heads 15 and 17 for causing hurt to P.W. 1 Rajamanickam. Accused 19 was charged for
an offence under Section 325, I.P.C. for causing grievous hurt to P.W. 2 Vedagiri under head 19. Accused 23 was
charged for an offence under Section 323 I.P.C. for causing hurt to P.W. 13 Kanammal under head 21. Accused
24 was charged for an offence under Section 324 I.P.C. under head 23 for causing hurt to P.W. 4 Gnanamurthi
with patta kathi. Accused 25 was charged under head 25 for an offence under Section 324 I.P.C. for causing hurt
with  iron  pipe  to  P.W.  4  Gnanamurthi.  Accused  26  was  charged  for  an  offence  under  Section  323  I.P.C.  under
head  27  for  causing  hurt  to  P.W.  4  Gnanamurthi,  Accused  27  was  charged  for  committing  an  offence  under
Section 323 I.P.C. under head 29 for causing hurt to P.W. 4 Gnanamurthi. Accused 8 was charged for an offence
under  Section  325  I.P.C.  under  head  31  for  causing  grievous  hurt  to  P.W.  4  Gnanamurthi.  Accused  10  was
charged for an offence under Section 325 I.P.C. under head 33 for causing grievous hurt to P.W. 4 Gnanamurthi.
Under charges Nos. 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, and 34 all the accused were charged for
offences under Sections 323, 324 and 325 I.P.C. read with Section 149 I.P.C. Accused 7, 8 and 10 were charged
for  an  offence  under  Section  427/34  I.P.C.  under  head  36  for  causing  mischief  in  the  house  of  P.W.  18
Karpagammal.  Accused 5, 8 and 9 were charged for an offence under  Section 427/34  I.P.C. under head 37 for
causing mischief in the house of P.W. 17 Rajammal. Accused 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 23
and 28 were charged for an offence under Section 426/34 I.P.C. under head 38 for causing damage to the engine
and pump of P.W. 13 Ranganathan. Accused 2, 3, 8 and 9 were charged for an offence under Section 427 read



with Section 34 I.P.C. under head 39 for causing mischief in the house of P.W. 18 Andammal.

9. Defence of all the accused except accused 4 was of total denial. Accused 4 admitted the dispute consequent
upon  attempt  of  accused  11  to  take  water  take  laying  pipelines,  the  visit  of  P.W.  5  on  11th  Nov.  1968,
demarcating of route along which pipeline was to be laid and erasure of it by the opposite faction. It was alleged
that they were involved on account of enmity. Accused 4 admitted that when he was examined on 27th Nov. 1968
by  the  Medical  Officer  he  had  injuries  on  his  person  but  he  did  not  know  who  caused  them.  He  had  filed  a
complaint in which he had stated that he was beaten on 27th Nov. 1968 at 12 noon by a mob consisting of 100
persons including deceased Gajarajan and his relatives.

10. As stated earlier, the learned Sessions Judge found serious discrepancies and contradictions in the evidence
of  witnesses  whom  he  considered  partisan  and  interested  and,  therefore,  discarded  their  testimony  in  entirety
and acquitted all the accused of the offences with which they were charged. When the matter came up before the
High Court in appeal against acquittal by the State, the High Court convicted accused Nos. 1, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 19, 20, 23, 26 and 27 for an offence under Section 147 I.P.C. under head I and also convicted accused 3,
4, 5, 9, 10, 16, 17, 18, 21, 24 and 25 for an offence under Section 148 I.P.C. under head 2. The High Court also
convicted accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 19 for an offence under  Section 302/34  I.P.C. and sentenced each of
them to suffer imprisonment for life and confirmed the acquittal of accused 8, 9, 10, 16, 17 and 20 for the said
offence under head 3. Consequently, under head 4 the High Court convicted accused 11, 12, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26 and 27 for an offence under  Section 326/149  I.P.C. holding the minimum common object to be
one  of  causing  grievous  hurt,  and  sentenced  each  of  them  to  suffer  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a  period  of  6
months. Accused 1 was convicted for an offence under Section 323 I.P.C. under head 7 for causing hurt to P.W. 8
Gangappa  Naicker.  Accused  2  was  convicted  under  head  9  for  an  offence  under  Section  324  I.P.C.  for  causing
hurt to P.W. 6 Subramaniam. Accused 4 was convicted for committing an offence under Section 324 I.P.C. under
two different heads 11 and 13 for causing hurt to  P.W. 2  Vedagiri and  P.W. 7  Krishaappa  Naicker respectively.
Accused  5  was  convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section  323  I.P.C.  for  causing  hurt  to  P.W.  17  Rajammal  under
head 17. Accused 19 was convicted for an offence under Section 325 I.P.C. for causing grievous hurt to P.W. 2
Vedagiri  under  head  19.  Accused  23  was  convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section  323  I.P.C.  for  causing  hurt  to
P.W. 13  Kanammal under head 21.  Accused 24 and 25 were convicted for an offence under  Section 324,  I.P.C.
under  heads  23  and  25  for  causing  hurt  to  P.W.  4  Gnanamurthi  with  patta  kathi  and  iron  pipe  respectively.
Accused 27 was convicted for an offence under Section 323 I.P.C. for causing hurt to P.W. 4 Gnanamurthi under
head  29.  Accused  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  15,  16,  17,  19,  20,  21  and  23  were  convicted  for  an  offence  under
Section 427/34 I.P.C. for causing mischief under head 38. Accused 2, 3, 8 and 9 were convicted for an offence
under  Section  427/34  I.P.C.  under  head  39.  The  High  Court  convicted  all  the  accused  except,  the  one
substantively  charged  under  corresponding  heads,  8,  10,  12,  14,  18,  20,  22,  24,  26  and  30  with  the  aid  of
Section 149 I.P.C. Charges under heads 5, 6, 15, 16, 27, 28, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36 and 37 were held not proved and
the accused were acquitted for the same. For the various offences under Sections 323, 324 and 325 I.P.C. read
with Section 149, I.P.C. sentences of imprisonment varying from three months to six months were imposed upon
each  of  the  accused.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  the  High  Court  largely  accepted  the  evidence  of  prosecution
witnesses except P. Ws. 10, 12 and 13.

11. A very detailed argument was addressed to us by Mr. Chitaley on behalf of accused Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
and 19 who have been convicted for an offence under Section 302/34 I.P.C. It was said that accused 1 to 7 and
19  have  been  convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section  302/34  I.P.C.  by  the  High  Court  not  on  the  basis  of  any
constructive or vicarious liability but on the finding that each one actively participated in the assault on deceased
Gajarajan.  Each  one  is  assigned  a  particular  role  and  therefore,  unless  participation  by  the  overt  act  is
satisfactorily  established  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  charge  is  brought  home  to  the  particular  accused.  There  is
considerable  force  in  this  submission.  It  is  all  the  more  so  because  the  High  Court  convicted  the  remaining
accused under Section 326/149 I.P.C. which would mean that the High Court did not accept the prosecution case
that  the  common  object  of  the  unlawful  assembly  was  to  commit  murder  of  deceased  Gajarajan.  We  would,
therefore, have to analyse the evidence about overt act attributed to each of accused 1 to 7 and 19.

12. Mr. Mulla on the other hand urged that this Court should tear in mind that there was strong motive for the
accused to cause harm to deceased Gajarajan that in all the deceased and the prosecution witnesses suffered as
many as 64 injuries including 29 by deceased, 14 by  P.W. 2, 12 by  P.W. 4, 5 by  P.W. 7, 2 by  P.W. 6 and one
each  by  P.  Ws.  1  and  8.  It  was  pointed  out  that  from  amongst  the  29  injuries  suffered  by  the  deceased,  three
were  individually  fatal  and  three  cumulatively  fatal  and  from  amongst  those  three  Injuries  which  were
cumulatively fatal some could be caused by pelting stones. It was pointed out that the incident is not in two parts
but  it  was  one  continuous  transaction  and  the  prosecution  was  not  to  benefit  by  dividing  it  into  two  parts.  He
said  that  at  any  rate,  Ext.  P-2,  does  corroborate  P.W.  1  In  respect  of  the  incident  at  the  well.  Mr.  Mulla
strenuously contended that the evidence of  P.W. 1 on its own is trustworthy and it is further assured by being
corroborated by Ex. P-2 and the medical evidence provides corroboration to the evidence of P.W. 1. It was urged
that  the  matter  should  be  looked  at  from  a  broad  spectrum  in  that  there  was  long  standing  feud  between  the
parties  and  the  incident  of  24th  Nov.,  1968  has  to  be  properly  appreciated.  Along  with  this,  the  fact  that  the
F.I.R. was lodged soon after the occurrence and that in respect of it some contradictory suggestions have been
made  would  not  detract  from  its  credibility,  He  said  that  the  approach  should  be;  Is  the  story  on  the  whole
reliable and whether appreciation of evidence by the High Court is fair and balanced?

It was urged that when participants in assault are being convicted with the aid of Sections 34 and 149 I.P.C., the
question of individual conduct is hardly relevant at all. Lastly, he said that if the court is not satisfied about the



role attributed to accused 19, even though the stone weighing about 4 kg., is found at the scene of occurrence,
because  the  medical  evidence  may  not  justify  the  allegation  of  dropping  of  the  stone  on  the  head  of  the
deceased,  the  Court  may  give  him  the  benefit  of  doubt  but  aside  of  that,  the  Court  may  only  examine  special
features  in  respect  of  the  role  attributed  to  individual  accused  with  regard  to  injuries  being  caused  to  some
prosecution witnesses and decide whether on those specific charges any one is entitled to benefit of doubt.

13. Mr.  Chitaley submitted that motive alleged is such that it may cut both the ways.  Long standing feud may
erupt into open hostility and assault. Simultaneously it may provoke victims to rope in as many members of the
opposite faction as could be conveniently interwoven in the main fabric of the prosecution case.

14. The motive alleged for the offence is that there were well divided factions in the village - one led by accused
11  and  the  other  led  by  P.W.  31.  All  the  accused,  apart  from  belonging  to  the  faction  led  by  accused  11,  are
inter-related. Accused 2, 3, 24, and 25 are sons of accused 11, Accused 9 and 10 are the sons of accused 8 who
is  the  brother  of  accused  11,  and  accused  26  is  brother  of  accused  11,  Accused  13  and  14  are  the  sons  of
accused 12 who is the brother of accused 11 and accused 27 is the wife of accused 12. Accused 1, 4, 15 and 23
are  the  sons  of  one  Kullappa  Naicker.  Accused  18  and  19  are  the  sons  of  accused  4,  Accused  6,  7,  16  are  the
sons of accused 15. Accused 22 is wife of accused 23 and accused 5 is the son of accused 23. Thus, by and large
all the accused are near relations of each other.  To some extent that is true of the prosecution witnesses also.
P.W. 31 is the head of the Panchayat and was also the leader of the faction. Deceased Gajarajan was the brother
of P.W. 31 and P.W. 4. P.W. 2 is the real brother of P.W. 1. The niece of P.W. 7 is married to P.W. 2. The sister
of P.W. 4 is married to the son of P.W. 1. P.W. 13 is the wife of elder brother of P.W. 1. P.W. 16 is the wife of
maternal uncle of P.W. 1. P.W. 9 is the cousin of P.W. 1. P.W. 12 is the wife of P.W. 9 and she is the sister of
P.W. 31 and deceased Gajarajan. P.W. 19 is the elder sister of P.W. 31, the deceased and P.W. 4. Deceased was
married  to  the  daughter  of  P.W.  19.  P.W.  20  is  the  wife  of  P.W.  4.  P.W.  21  is  the  wife  of  P.W.  31.  Thus,  the
prosecution witnesses are also more or less near relations of each other. The cause of discord between the two
factions dates back to 1956 when accused 11 wanted to take water by laying pipelines from his well in  Survey
No. 102 to the field bearing Survey No. 166/2 belonging to his wife and this was objected to by a large number
of villagers alleged to have been led by P.W. 31. Since then accused 11 made strenuous efforts to get permission
for laying the pipelines and P.W. 31 and his supporters stoutly resisted the same. The entire history of discord is
clearly set out in the evidence of P.W. 5. Additional Revenue Officer, T. A. Thandapani and to some extent it is
supported by documentary evidence, The Collector granted the permission to lay the pipeline but he suspended it
on objection by P.W. 31 and his supporters. Subsequently, by Ext. P-5 he directed pipeline to be laid along the
cart track and further directed the Tahsildar to demarcate the route and the witness P.W. 5 was directed to visit
the village after giving notice to both the parties and actually the witness visited the village on 11th November
1968  when  Ext.  P-1  signed  by  63  local  residents  including  P.  Ws.  1,  2,  4,  6,  7  and  deceased  Gajarajan  was
submitted  to  him.  He  demarcated  the  route  along  which  the  pipeline  was  to  be  laid  and  a  large  crowd  had
collected there.  About 100 persons obstructed the marking of the line.  Some people mischievously behaved by
obliterating the line whereupon witness Thandapani recorded the statement Ext. P- 20 and submitted his report
Ext. P-7. There is no dispute that such an event did occur. Amongst others, accused 11 has admitted these facts
in  his  statement  under  Section  313,  Cr.P.C.  The  only  point  submitted  by  Mr.  Chitaley  on  behalf  of  the  accused
was that Gajarajan was not one of the persons who participated in obstructing demarcation of the line and on the
contrary the evidence shows that he was in a conciliatory mood. There is some substance in the submission that
Gajarajan did not participate in erasing the line and in fact he persuaded his compatriots to desist from such a
course and not to obstruct the officers discharging their duty. The fact however, remains that this dispute about
taking water and laying pipeline had divided the local village community into two rival factions and one faction
was  led  by  P.W.  31,  the  head  of  the  local  Panchayat  Gajarajan  was  his  brother.  In  this  background,  the
submission  that  there  was  no  motive  to  cause  harm  to  Gajarajan  cannot  be  accepted.  There  was  enmity  and
bitterness  between  the  two  factions.  Gajarajan  belonged  to  one  faction.  Accused  belonged  to  opposite  faction.
Therefore, this dispute about taking water and the consequent vivisection of the local village community would
establish some motive on the part of the accused to cause harm to  Gajarajan.  But then in this background the
Court  has  to  be  careful  to  find  out  whether  this  very-fact  may  not  induce  some  witnesses  to  involve  as  many
persons of the opposite faction as possible.

1 5 . It  was  said  that  the  High  Court  was  in  error  in  placing  implicit  reliance  on  the  evidence  of  P.W.  1  as
corroborated  by  Ext.  P-2  and  the  evidence  of  P.  Ws.  6  and  9.  The  High  Court  has  observed  in  para.  52  of  its
judgment  that  the  testimony  of  P.W.  1  corroborated  by  the  contents  of  Ext.  P-2  is  wholly  credible  and  reliable
and  the  High  Court  has  no  hesitation  in  placing  total  reliance  on  his  testimony.  Mr.  Chitaley  took  serious
exception  to  this  certificate  awarded  to  P.W.  1  and  contended  that  there  are  a  number  of  infirmities  in  his
evidence and it would be hazardous to place implicit reliance on" his testimony. Simultaneously it was said that
Ext. P-2, the F.I.R. has come into existence in such circumstances and contains such details and omits such vital
facts of the prosecution case that it could not render credence to the evidence of P.W. 1 and it was not worthy of
reliance.

16. P.W. 1 Rajmanickam is a very material witness in this case, According to him, on the date of occurrence i.e.
27th November 1968 around 1 p. m. he returned to his house from his field and after taking food while he was
on  the  way  to  the  field  again  via  Perianal  Koil  Street  he  saw  deceased  Gajarajan  alighting  from  a  bus  which
arrived from Madras side and proceeded towards his house and when he was passing through the battai leading
to Gangamma Koil he saw accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23
and 28 coming out of Casuarina Thope along with several others and they waylaid deceased Gajarajan who was
proceeding towards his house, Gajarajan started running and he was chased by the aforementioned persons and



when  Gajarajan  reached  near  the  well  situated  near  the  Teachers'  Quarters  at  Karpakkam,  accused  No.  1  beat
Gajarajan  on  his  right  shoulder  with  a  stick,  accused  2  inflicted  an  injury  on  the  head  of  Gajarajan  with  patta
knife and accused 3 inflicted an injury on the head of  Gajarajan with vettu kathi.  After receiving these injuries
Gajarajan ran towards the house of P.W. 10, Govindaraja Naicker, Witness P.W. 1 proceeded near the Eravanam
of  the  house  of  Govindaraja  Naicker  and  concealed  himself  behind  the  eravanam.  The  witness  deposed  that
Gajarajan fell down near the house of P.W. 10 Govindaraja Naicker and at that time accused 4 caused an injury
with  patta  knife  on  the  right  hand  side  of  Gajarajan.  He  saw  accused  5  causing  an  Injury  with  patta  knife  to
Gajarajan on his right thigh. He also saw P.W. 2 Vedagiri coming running to the place and accused 4 caused two
injuries on the head of P.W. 2 with patta kathi. He also saw P.W. 6 Subramaniam emerging from his house and
accused 2 inflicted an injury with patta kathi on the left leg of the latter. P.W. 6 Subramaniam ran away from that
place.  He  further  stated  that  accused  5  Ramu  alias  Raman  s/o  accused  23  attacked  him  with  a  spear  but  he
escaped the blow and in the process his shirt was torn. At that time accused 5 hurled a stone at him which hit
him on his right knee. P.W. 1 stated that he entered the house of Krishnappa Naicker and bolted the door. After
some  time  he  emerged  from  that  house  and  when  he  came  out  he  saw  accused  6  Guruswami  and  accused  7
Vishwanathan hurling stones at Gajarajan. The witness further stated that he also saw accused No. 19 bringing a
stone and dropping it on the head of deceased Gajarajan at that time. The witness has been cross-examined at
great  length  and  we  are  constrained  to  observe  that  the  learned  Sessions  Judge  hardly  bothered  to  determine
whether the questions put in cross-examination were permissible or not. One curious practice not known to law
adopted by him was that whenever a witness was asked about an omission with reference to the statement of the
witness  recorded  by  the  investigating  officer  under  Section  161,  Cr.P.C.,  the  learned  Public  Prosecutor  would
make a statement whether the statement referred to in evidence was to be found or was not to be found in the
statement under Section 161, Cr.P.C. and no attempt was made to prove the omission. Such concession for proof
of  contradiction  or  omission  lacks  support  of  law  and  is  likely  to  be  unfair  to  the  witness  in  that  when  the
investigating  officer  is  questioned  with  regard  to  the  contradiction  or  omission,  a  further  opportunity  will  be
available to him to explain the contradiction or omission.

17. Mr. Chitaley urged that the witness belongs to the faction of P.W. 31. That does not appear to be in dispute.
The witness appears to have suffered one injury by a stone hurled by accused 5. He was examined by P.W. 11
Dr. Ramachandran. The witness has suffered a contused wound over the inner aspect of right leg just 2 inches
below  the  knee  of  the  size  of  2  1/4  X  1  1/2  cms.  Mr.  Chitaley  urged  that  witness  P.W.  1  is  a  partisan  witness
belonging to the faction led by P.W. 31. He admitted that he instituted a criminal complaint against the person
belonging  to  the  accused  party,  including  accused  1,  2,  3,  6,  7,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  15,  16,  17,  18  and  26.  A
Criminal  Case  No. 822 of 1965 was registered on the basis of his complaint and in that case the accused were
acquitted. He also admitted that accused 11 had Instituted 2-3 criminal cases against him in the Criminal Court.
He also admitted that accused 2  Raja  Ram  had  instituted  a  criminal  case  against  him.  He  further  admitted  that
accused 12 had filed a criminal case against him and P.W. 31. He is a member of the Panchayat of which P.W. 31
is the  President.  This evidence is sufficient to show that he belongs to the faction of  P.W. 31.  One noteworthy
feature of his evidence is that he admitted that witnesses Subramaniam, Krishnammal and Pattammal are related
to  him  and  that  they  will  depose  as  per  his  direction  and  instigation.  The  type  of  answer  elicited  in  cross-
examination may not be given its full weight. Added to this is the fact that he is a signatory to the memorandum
dated  11th  November  1968,  Ext.  P-1  submitted  to  Revenue  Divisional  Officer  along  with  a  number  of  other
persons  objecting  to  the  grant  of  permission  to  lay  pipeline  for  taking  water  as  prayed  for  by  accused  11.  It
would  unmistakably  appear  that  the  witness  belongs  to  the  faction  of  P.W.  31  and  hence  a  partisan  witness.
Unfortunately  the  High  Court  did  not  examine  this  aspect  before  reaching  the  conclusion  that  his  testimony  is
absolutely trustworthy. It is not for a moment suggested that the evidence of partisan witness must be discarded
on that ground alone. Times without number this Court has said that that would not be a correct approach. That
puts the  Court on guard to scrutinise their evidence with more than ordinary care vide  R.  Kondaiah v.  State of
A.P. MANU/SC/0195/1974 : 1975CriLJ262 . It must focus its attention on whether there are discrepancies in the
evidence;  whether  the  evidence  strikes  the  court  as  genuine,  and  whether  the  story  as  narrated  is  probable.
Judicial approach has to be cautious in dealing with such evidence. The circumstances surrounding the presence
of  this  witness  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  are  purely  fortuitous  coupled  with  the  fact  that  he  is  a  partisan
witness and hence his evidence will have to be examined with great care and caution.

18. In  accepting  the  testimony  of  P.W.  1  the  High  Court  was  impressed  by  the  fact  that  he  is  corroborated  by
Exhibit P-2, the F.I.R. in this case. Evidence of P.W. 32 Subrarnaniam, Taluk Sub-Inspector would show that on
receipt of telephonic message he rushed to the scene of occurrence. Soon thereafter armed police reinforcement
arrived. He sent deceased Gajarajan and P.W. 4 Gnanamurthi to the General Hospital in a taxi and then he took P.
Ws. 1, 2, 6 and 7 in the police van to the police station. On reaching the police station he recorded Ext. P-2, the
F.I.R. as lodged by P.W. 1. Two suggestions were made with regard to the veracity of the contents of Ext. P-2, It
was said that it was lodged by P.W. 1 in consultation with P.W. 31 who was already at Royapattah Hospital, and
the details were settled in consultation with P. Ws. 2, 6 and 7 while travelling by police van on the way to the
police  station.  Cross-examination  of  P.W.  1  itself  reveals  that  part  of  the  information  contained  in  Ext.  P-2  is
stated by him on the information received by him from persons who had suffered injuries and not of his personal
knowledge. The High Court has reproduced the entire Ext. P-2 in its judgment. In Ext. P-2 the names of accused
1 to 23 are mentioned though there is some controversy about the name of accused 3 being found in Ext. P-2.
The weapon carried by each of them is also mentioned.  But it was contended that while giving evidence in the
court P.W. 1 over and above described the role of individual accused and the weapon wielded by him and also
neatly pinpointed the seat of each injury. In the F.I.R. Ext. P-2 it is not stated as to on what part of the body the
blow by particular accused landed. We are not inclined to attach undue importance to the fact that in the F.I.R.

the witness has not stated as to on what part of the body the blow fell. What is worthy of note is that according
to the witness 50-60 persons emerged from Casuarina Thope and chased deceased Gajarajan and when Gajarajan
was near the well he was attacked by accused 1, 2, 3, and when Gajarajan reached a further distance of 225 ft.
he fell down near the house of P.W. 10 Govindaraja Naicker but till then no other accused could attack him. The
omission  of  the  names  of  accused  24,  25,  26  and  27  in  Ext.  P-2  is  glaring.  It  becomes  all  the  more  glaring
because  accused  No.  24  is  a  son  of  accused  11,  the  latter  being  the  leader  of  the  opposite  faction.  P.W.  6
witnessed accused 24 causing injury to P.W. 4 with patta knife. P.W. 6 was in the same police van by which P.W.
1  travelled  to  the  police  station  and  their  description  about  the  occurrence  is  similar  and  yet;  the  name  of
accused 24 does not figure in the F.I.R. Ext. P-2. On an overall view of these circumstances it would be unsafe to
place  total  reliance  on  the  contents  of  Ext.  P-2.  Undoubtedly  it  would  to  some  extent  lend  assurance  to  the
evidence of P.W. 1 but both will have to be taken with an amount of caution.

19. The High Court then examined the evidence of P. Ws. 6 and 9 which according to the High Court would lend
assurance  to  the  evidence  of  P.W.  1.  P.W.  6  Subrarnaniam  stated  in  his  evidence  that  on  the  date  of  the
occurrence around 2.30 p.m. when he was sitting in the verandah he heard noise coming from the side  of  the
school  and  he  saw  deceased  Gajarajan  coming  running  by  the  side  of  the  Teachers'  Quarters.  He  also  saw  50
persons  including  all  the  accused  coming  running  armed  with  sticks,  knives,  pipes,  etc.  He  deposed  that  these
persons waylaid  Gajarajan,  The witness developed fear and got into his house and bolted the door from inside
the house. He then heard the cries of Gajarajan "ayyo ayyo" coming from near the house of P.W. 10 Govindaraja
Naicker whereupon the witness opened the door and came out to see what had happened.  He deposed that he
saw  Gajarajan lying in front of the house of  P.W. 10 and accused 4 was standing armed with knife.  Accused 5
Ramu alias Raman inflicted an injury with knife on the right thigh of Gajarajan. Accused 21 beat the witness with
a stone on the middle of the chest but he did not sustain any external injury. The witness further deposed that
accused 2 Rajaram came running with a patta knife and inflicted an injury on his calf muscle with the patta knife.
P.W. 6 fell down as he suffered a bleeding injury on his leg. He deposed that he saw P.W. 1 standing near the
house  of  P.W.  10  Govindaraja  Naicker,  and  he  saw  accused  2,  5  and  21  chasing  P.W.  1  by  the  back  side  of
Govindaraja Naicker's house. He also deposed that P.W. 4 was coming running towards the house of Govindaraja
Naicker  and  he  also  saw  accused  24-27  coming  running  from  Munnuswami  Naicker's  house.  He  deposed  that
accused 24 inflicted injury with patta knife on the head of P.W. 4 and accused 25 beat P.W. 4 with an iron pipe.
Accused 26 pelted a stone on P.W. 4 which hit him on his stomach. He stated that accused 27 was having a bag
of  stones  and  that  they  all  went  away  towards  the  well  of  accused  11.  Now,  unfortunately,  the  High  Court
observes in paragraph 45 that on a total consideration of the evidence of P.W. 1, corroborated by the testimony
of P. Ws. 9 and 6 and the contents of Ext. P-2, the offence under Section 302 read with Section 34, I.P.C. has
been  brought  home  against  accused  17  and  19.  Very  unfortunately  this  witness  P.W.  6  does  not  say  one  word
about the attack by accused 1, 2, and 3, on  Gajarajan near the well.  He made a very general statement that a
crowd of 50 persons including all the accused came running armed with knives, sticks and pipes.  This witness
could be said to lend assurance to the evidence of P.W. 2 about accused 4 and 5 being near deceased Gajarajan
when he was found lying near the house of  P.W. 10.  The witness does not say about the accused 6, 7 and 19
causing injury by stones to Gajarajan, We are constrained to observe that the High Court without examining the
evidence of the witness has made a bald statement unsupported by evidence that the evidence of  P.W. 6 lends
assurance  to  the  evidence  of  P.W.  1.  We  may  also  point  out  that  while  the  witness  says  he  saw  accused  4
standing near Gajarajan with a knife he does not say he saw him causing injury to the deceased.

20. Turning now to the evidence of P.W. 9 Narayanaswami it should be pointed out that he is the husband of the
sister of deceased Gajarajan. He deposed that on the date of the occurrence when he was coming with his cattle
to his house he saw deceased Gajarajan alighting from a bus. He also saw a large number of persons rushing out
of  Casuarina  Thope  raising  the  alarm  'Pidida'.  The  witness  stated  that  when  deceased  Gajarajan  was  near  the
drinking  water  well,  he  was  waylaid  by  accused  1  who  beat  him  with  a  stick.  He  also  saw  accused  2  causing
injury with patta kathi and accused 3 causing injury with vettu kathi to the deceased. He deposed that as stones
were being hurled he himself ran to the house of witness Doraiswami and concealed himself in the house and he
came  out  after  the  police  arrived  at  the  scene  of  occurrence.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  this  witness  is  a  near
relation of the deceased, his presence at the scene of the occurrence is very fortuitous. He not only belongs to
the  faction  of  P.W.  31  but  is  a  near  relation  of  P.  Ws.  31,  4  and  deceased  Gajarajan  who  are  brothers.  In  his
cross-examination  he  stated  that  he  did  not  know  whether  the  blows  inflicted  by  accused  2  and  3  fell  on  the
deceased or not. A contradiction was brought on record with reference to the police statement in which he has
merely used the word 'knife' and not 'patta kathi'.  Looking to the fact that the witness is a near relation of the
deceased,  that  to  some  extent  he  is  a  chance  witness  and  the  contradiction  from  his  police  statement,  his
evidence will have to be taken with an amount of caution.

21. As pointed out earlier, the High Court has implicitly relied on the evidence of P.W. 1 on the ground that it is
corroborated by Ext. P-2 and the evidence of P. Ws. 6 and 9, The expanse of this statement is wide of the mark.
We  have  analysed  the  entire  corroboratory  evidence  and  it  appears  that  the  corroboratory  evidence  does  not
render the evidence of P.W. 1 wholly trustworthy. Evidence of P.W. 1 will have to be scanned in respect of each
accused he seeks to implicate to ascertain against whom it is satisfactorily corroborated by other evidence.  We
will, therefore, analyse the evidence against each of the aforementioned accused.

22. Accused No. 1 Muthu Naicker was identified as being in the crowd that chased Gajarajan by P. Ws. 1, 2, 9,
18  and  22.  Out  of  these  witnesses,  P.W.  1  saw  him  inflicting  an  injury  with  the  stick  on  the  shoulder  of
Gajarajan. P.W. 2 claimed to identify accused 1 by his voice. P.W. 9 also says that accused I beat deceased near
the well but he did not know whether the blow landed on him or not. His name is to be found mentioned with the



weapon wielded by him in Ext. P-2. Even if we apply what has been described as mechanical test in a case of this
nature where at least three persons identified him in the unlawful assembly and he was armed with a weapon and
was  seen  by  two  witnesses  wielding  the  weapon,  and  the  medical  evidence  of  injury  on  the  deceased
corroborates the fact that a stick blow had landed on the right hand of the deceased, his presence in the unlawful
assembly and participation in the assault on the deceased is unmistakably established and the evidence against
him deserves to be accepted.

23. Accused 2  Raja  Ram was identified in the unlawful assembly by  P.  Ws. 1, 6, 9, 17, 18, 20 and 22.  P.W. 1
says  that  he  saw  accused  2  armed  with  patta  kathi  and  inflicting  an  injury  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  of
deceased. He is also shown to have caused an injury on the leg of P.W. 6. At least P.W. 6 who has suffered an
injury, as borne out by medical evidence, by a sharp edged weapon, was in a position to identify his assailant.
P.W. 9 refers to his presence in the crowd with a knife which he has described at patta knife. The presence of this
accused in the unlawful assembly and participation in the assault is very affirmatively established and the High
Court was right in accepting the evidence against him,

24. Accused 3 Vedagiri was seen in the assembly by P. Ws. 1, 9, 17, 20, 21, 22 and 23. Further P. Ws. 17 and
18  speak  of  his  having  entered  the  house  of  P.W.  18  and  caused  damage  to  the  goods.  P.W.  19  speaks  of  his
having caused damage to the pump set and doors and windows though in this respect he has been contradicted
by the police statement. Now, applying the test we have evolved in the facts and circumstances of this case, the
presence of this accused is referred to by at least five witnesses and others refers to his activity which occurred
at or about the time of occurrence. However, there is a serious lacuna in the evidence against him and the High
Court appears to have completely overlooked it and this manifest error emanates from the fact that the copy of
the  F.I.R.  which  the  High  Court  has  used  for  reproduction  in  its  judgment  materially  differs  in  respect  of  this
accused  from  the  copy  supplied  to  us  in  Vol.  V,  of  the  record.  We  are  unable  to  find  out  how  such  a  glaring
discrepancy in the two copies has occurred but we would rely on the copy supplied to us in  Vol.  V.  In view of
this, Mr. Chitaley rightly urged that the name of accused 3 is not to be found in the F.I.R. and this fact was not
controverted by Mr. Mulla, learned Counsel for the respondent State. The High Court had reproduced the entire
Ext. P-2 in paragraph 43 of its Judgment. In the middle portion of Ext. P-2 as reproduced by the High Court at p.
1426 of the record where P.W. I describes the assault it reads as under:

They obstructed Gajarajan Naicker near the teachers' quarters. Muthu Naicker (accused 1) beat Gajarajan
with  a  stick.  Rajaram  (accused  2)  son  of  Kuppu  Naicker  (accused  11)  cut  him  with  the  patta  knife.
Vedagiri (accused 3) also cut him with a vettu knife. Gajarajan Naicker managed, came running and fell
down in front of the house of Govindaraja Naicker (P.W. 10).

25. Now, when we refer to the copy of the F.I.R. supplied to the Court at p. 5, Vol. V, it reads as under:

They waylaid him near Teachers Quarters. Muthu Naicker (A-1) beat Gajaraj with a stick. Rajaram, son of
Kuppu  Naicker  (A-2)  cut  him  with  a  patta  knife.  Gajaraj  escaped,  came  running  and  fell  down  before
Govindaraj Naicker's (P.W. 10's) house.

26. In any other portion of the F.I.R., Ext. P-2 as set out in Vol. V there is no reference to accused 3. Therefore,
it appears crystal clear that the name of accused 3 is not mentioned in the F.I.R. Now, if P.W. 1 is the material
witness  and  he  has  vividly  described  the  assault  on  the  deceased  at  the  well  where  accused  3  is  said  to  have
caused injury to deceased and yet in the F.I.R. Ext. P-2 he has not mentioned the name of accused 3, it would be
hazardous to accept the evidence against him as being present in the unlawful assembly and participating in the
assault. It becomes all the more difficult because P.W. 6, who is the other witness according to the High Court as
affording corroboration to the evidence of P.W. 1, does not say anything about accused 3 causing any injury to
deceased  Gajarajan.  It thus becomes crystal clear  that  the  name  of  this  accused  is  not  mentioned  in  the  F.I.R.
Ext. P-2 and the evidence of P.W. 1 is not corroborated by the evidence of P.W. 6 and P.W. 9 is not clear about
what  this  accused  is  supposed  to  have  done.  In  these  circumstances  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  accused  3  is
entitled to the benefit of doubt with regard to the charge under Section 302/34, I.P.C.

27. Accused No. 4 was seen in the unlawful assembly by P. Ws. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 18 and 22. About the presence of
accused 4 in the unlawful assembly there is unimpeachable evidence. P.W. 33 D. D. Srinivasan, Sub-Inspector of
Police in his evidence stated that after he learnt of the occurrence at  Karpakkam village, he rushed with police
constables  to  that  village  and  when  he  reached  there  at  4.45  p.m.  he  found  armed  Reserve  Police  personnel
present there.  P.W. 32  Subramaniam,  Taluk  Sub-Inspector was not in the village.  This witness  P.W. 33 started
taking round in the village and when he reached Kaliamman Koil Street, he found accused 4 Singara Naicker lying
there with injuries on his person and he was not in a position to speak. The witness at once sent accused 4 in a
cart to the hospital for treatment. Accused 4 was examined by P.W. 15 Dr. Pragdeeswaran and the certificate of
injury,  Ext.  P-15 shows that accused 4 had suffered a minor abrasion over ilium and lacerated wound on right
mandible.  Accused 4 in his statement under  Section 313,  Cr.P.C. stated that he had suffered the injury but did
not know who caused the injury to him (vide question No. 43). Again it must be remembered that this accused
gave  two  blows  with  patta  kathi  to  P.W.  2  and  his  presence  and  causing  injury  to  P.W.  7  is  spoken  by  P.W.  7
though of course on this point an omission was brought on record in the evidence of P.W. 7 with reference to his
evidence  in  the  committing  Magistrate's  Court.  Mr.  Chitaley  also  commented  on  the  fact  that  while  the  medical
officer  had  asked  this  accused  as  to  how  he  suffered  the  injury,  in  the  case  of  injury  to  P.W.  7  at  the  lime  of
examination  by  the  Medical  Officer  he  has  not  stated  that  he  suffered  the  Injury  at  the  hands  of  accused  4.  In
fact, the evidence against this accused satisfactorily establishes his presence in the unlawful assembly as also his



participation in the assault on the deceased.

28. Accused  5  is  alleged  to  have  caused  an  injury  with  patta  kathi  on  the  right  thigh  of  the  deceased.  This  is
spoken to by P. Ws. 1, 2 and 6. P. W 17 refers to his presence in the crowd but failed to identify him in the Court
and, therefore, that evidence would not be of any assistance to the prosecution. P. Ws. 18, 19 and 22 have seen
this  accused  in  the  unlawful  assembly.  With  regard  to  the  injury  alleged  to  have  been  caused  by  this  accused
there is corroboration in the form of medical evidence. There is further the evidence of P.W. 1 that this accused
tried to give him a stab blow with his spear but he warded off the blow and in the process his shirt was torn. In
this connection it is clearly stated in the F.I.R. Ext. P-2 that accused 5 attempted to thrust a spear in his stomach
but he escaped and his shirt was torn and accused 5 then hurled a stone which hurt P.W. 1 on the right knee. On
the question of injury on his right leg, P.W. 1 is corroborated by the medical evidence. It is also stated in Ext. P-
2 that accused 5 gave a blow with patta kathi to the deceased.  Therefore, on the identity and presence of this
accused evidence of P.W. 1 is corroborated by Ext. P-2, by the medical evidence as well as by the evidence of P.
Ws.  18,  19  and  22  as  having  seen  (him  in  the  unlawful  assembly.  His  presence  and  participation  is  clearly
established by more than three witnesses and, therefore, the charge is brought home to him.

29. Accused 6 and 7 are alleged to have pelted stones at deceased Gajarajan and caused injuries to him. On the
important point of pelting stones at Gajarajan there is evidence of P.W. 1 alone against accused 6 and 7 and even
in respect of that part of his evidence the learned Sessions Judge has noted that after P.W. 1 described the entire
incident and then referred to his having concealed himself in the house of Krishnappa Naicker, and thereafter the
witness volunteered that accused 6 and 7 pelted stones. That is an infirmity in the evidence of this sole witness
on  the  question  of  pelting  stones  against  accused  6  and  7.  P.W.  19  has  stated  that  he  had  seen  accused  6
brandishing an iron pipe but a contradiction is brought on record in his evidence which shows that in the police
statement he had referred to a stick in the hand of accused 6. P. Ws. 20, 22 and 24 referred to the presence of
accused 6 in the crowd. Similarly, P. Ws. 19, 20 and 22 referred to the presence of accused 7 in the crowd. As
pointed out earlier, the High Court convicted accused 6 and 7 for the offence under Section 302/34 I.P.C. not on
the ground that they were members of the unlawful assembly but on the ground that they shared the common
intention of accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 19 to commit the murder of Gajarajan and that this common intention is
manifested on account of overt act of pelting stones by accused 6 and 7 at deceased Gajarajan. If the conviction
thus rests on the alleged overt act of pelting stones, that aspect is spoken to by P.W. 1 alone. It was, however,
said  that  on  this  aspect  P.W.  1  is  corroborated  by  Ext.  P-2.  The  statement  in  Ext.  P-2  on  this  point  is  slightly
ambiguous. It is stated that accused 6 Guruswami threw stones at him and accused 7 Vishwanathan also threw
stones.  Whether  the  stones  did  hit  Gajarajan  or  not  is  nowhere  spoken  to  in  Ext.  P-2.  And  again,  as  stated
earlier, P. Ws. 6 and 9 did not say one word against accused 6 and 7 though the High Court observed that the
testimony of P.W. 1 is rendered wholly trustworthy on being corroborated by Ext. P-2 and the evidence of P. Ws.
6 and 9. It would thus appear that in respect of accused 6 and 7 such corroboration is not forthcoming. It was,
however, said that the evidence of P.W. 3 Dr. C. B. Gopalakrishnan would clearly show that deceased Gajarajan
had suffered injuries Nos. 5, 10, 15 and 18 by being struck by stones. When deceased Gajarajan fell down near
the house of P.W. 10 the evidence of P.W. 1 is that he was encircled by members of the unlawful assembly. If
thereafter accused 6 and 7 pelted stones at Gajarajan it is difficult to believe that they would hit Gajarajan and
even P.W. 1 does not say that the stones hurled by accused 6 and 7 did hit Gajarajan. In this state of evidence
we  are  not  satisfied  that  accused  6  and  7  participated  in  the  assault  on  Gajarajan  by  pelting  stones  and,
therefore, the charge under Section 302/34 I.P.C. is not brought home to them.

30. The last in this group of accused is accused 19 who is convicted for an offence under Section 302/34, I.P.C.
We  must  frankly  say  that  the  High  Court  was  in  serious  error  in  convicting  accused  19  for  an  offence  under
Section 302/34 I.P.C. on the allegation that he brought a stone weighing about 4 kg. and dropped it on the head
of deceased Gajarajan. In the F.I.R. Ext. P-2, P.W. 1 has stated that accused 19 carried a stone and threw it on
the  head  of  Gajarajan.  This  one  sentence  in  the  F.I.R.  has  raised  considerable  doubt  in  our  mind  about  the
truthfulness of the averments made in the F.I.R. which according to the High Court was recorded as expeditiously
as  possible  and  would,  therefore,  render  corroboration  to  the  evidence  of  P.W.  1.  P.W.  1  in  his  evidence  has
stated that accused 19 dropped the stone on the head of deceased Gajarajan and a stone which was recovered,
M.O. 2, from the scene of occurrence was identified by the witness to be the one which was dropped by accused
19 on the head of Gajarajan. P.W. 3, Dr. Gopalakrishnan who has been subjected to cross-examination on this
facet of the case, has admitted in cross-examination that if a man stood near deceased Gajarajan and dropped a
stone about 4 kg. in weight, he would expect that, the skull would be broken into multiple bits, and he further
stated  that  if  the  stone  is  thrown  with  great  force,  the  skull  would  be  crushed.  If  this  part  of  evidence  is
correlated to the external injuries found on the person of deceased Gajarajan it would appear that the evidence of
the witness P.W. 1 on the question of dropping stone is materially contradicted by the medical evidence. It was,
however, said that P.W. 2 Vedagiri has stated that accused 19 pelted a stone at him which caused an injury on
his  left  hand  finger.  That  may  at  best  show  that  accused  19  was  present  at  the  scene  of  occurrence  but  that
would not render corroboration to the evidence of P.W. 1 on the role attributed by him to accused 19. P. Ws. 19,
22 and 23 refer to his presence in the crowd. The analysis of the evidence would show that P.W. 1 is the only
witness on the question of participation in the assault by accused 19 on deceased Gajarajan and that part of his
evidence was added by him volunteering the information after he had described the whole incident which might
show  his  anxiety  that  he  may  not  miss  involving  accused  19  in  the  occurrence.  Apart  from  that,  the  greater
infirmity  in  the  evidence  is  that  he  is  contradicted  by  the  medical  evidence.  Mr.  Mulla  learned  Counsel  for  the
respondent  also  submitted  that  if  the  medical  evidence  renders  the  statement  of  P.W.  1  against  accused  19
unworthy of belief we may give him the benefit of such reasonable doubt as we may entertain arising from the
state of evidence. Therefore, in this state of evidence we feel that the High Court was not justified in holding that


the charge under Section 302/34 I.P.C. is brought home to accused 19 and he is entitled to be acquitted of this
charge.

31. The analysis of the evidence keeping in view the appreciation of evidence by the High Court would show that
the charge under Section 302/34, I.P.C. is brought home to accused 1, 2, 4 and 5 only and the charge against
accused 3, 6, 7 and 19 fails.

32. At this stage we are faced with an anomalous situation arising from the judgment of the High Court. We are
satisfied  that  accused  Nos.  3,  6,  7  and  19  did  not  participate  in  the  assault  on  deceased  Gajarajan.  They  will,
therefore,  be  in  the  same  position  as  the  High  Court  held  in  respect  of  accused  Nos.  8,  9,  10,  16,  17  and  20
whose participation in the assault on deceased Gajarajan as alleged by the prosecution was not held proved by
the  High  Court.  Now,  under  head  No.  4  accused  Nos.  11-15,  18  and  21-28  were  charged  for  an  offence  under
Section 302 read with Section 149, I.P.C. no such charge in the alternative against accused Nos. 1 to 10, 16, 17,
19  and  20  was  framed.  While  convicting  accused  Nos.  11-15,  18  and  21-27  for  an  offence  under  Section
326/149, I.P.C. those who were acquitted of the charge under Section 302/34, I.P.C. viz., accused Nos. 8, 9, 10,
16,17,  20  were  not  convicted  on  the  alternative  charge  under  Section  302  read  with  Section  149  I.P.C.  even
though they were held to be members of the unlawful assembly, a fact discernible from the finding recorded on
charges 1 and 2 in which accused 8 and 20 have been convicted for an offence under Section 147 I.P.C. being
members  of  an  unlawful  assembly  and  committing  the  offence  of  rioting,  and  accused  9,  10,  16-17  have  been
convicted for an offence under Section 148 I.P.C. in that they committed an offence of rioting armed with deadly
weapons.  Yet,  when  it  came  to  the  question  of  vicarious  liability  for  an  offence  under  Section  326/149,  I.P.C.,
accused 8, 9, 10, 16, 17 and 20 have not been convicted for the same though they are held to be members of the
unlawful assembly. It may be that the High Court acquitted them for the charge under Section 302/34, I.P.C., on
the ground that they were not shown to be participants in the assault on Gajarajan, yet if the High Court recorded
a  finding  that  the  minimum  common  object  of  the  unlawful  assembly  was  to  cause  grievous  hurt  and  if  the
members  of  the  unlawful  assembly  knew  that  such  offence  was  likely  to  be  committed  in  prosecution  of  the
common object of the unlawful assembly, then consistent with that finding the High Court could not have failed
to  record  a  finding  against  accused  8,  9,  10,  16,  17  and  20  convicting  them  for  an  offence  under  Section
326/149, I.P.C. But that having not been done, by necessary implication the acquittal of accused 8, 9, 10, 16, 17
and 20 for the offence under Section 326/149, I.P.C. has become final as it has not been challenged by the State
by  way  of  appeal,  We  cannot  convict  them  for  the  offence  under  Section  326/149,  I.P.C.  in  this  appeal  by  the
accused against their conviction and sentence for other offences. Accused Nos. 3, 6, 7 and 19 who according to
us are not shown to have participated in the assault on deceased Gajarajan should be similarly treated in respect
of charge No. 4. Suffice it to say that no charge under Section 302/149, I.P.C. was framed against them.

3 3 . Under  charge  4,  the  High  Court  has  convicted  accused  11-15,  18,  21-27  for  an  offence  under  Section
326/149, I.P.C. observing that these accused at least must have known that an offence under Section 325 (see
original),  I.P.C.  was  likely  to  be  committed  in  prosecution  of  the  common  object  of  the  unlawful  assembly,
particularly in view of the fact that Gajarajan was attacked and beaten by accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 19. After
holding that these accused must have known that at least an offence of grievous hurt was likely to be committed
in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly and after referring to Section 325, I.P.C. the High
Court convicted the aforementioned accused under Section 326/149, I.P.C. Apart from that, once the High Court
after  holding  that  accused  Nos.  8,  9,  10,  16,  17  and  20  were  members  of  the  unlawful  assembly  though  they
were not shown to have participated in the assault on  Gajarajan, ought to have logically convicted them under
Section  326/149,  I.P.C.  consistent  with  its  finding  in  para.  65.  That  having  not  been  done  and  the  acquittal  of
accused 8, 9, 10, 16, 17 and 20 for the offence under Section 326/149, I.P.C. having become final, accused 3, 6,
7 and 19 would have to be acquitted of the same charge for the reasons hereinbefore mentioned. It would thus
not only be unfair but self-contradictory to sustain the conviction of accused 11-15, 18 and 21-27 for the offence
under  Section 326/149,  I.P.C.  That would be an unequal treatment and, therefore, even though as members of
the unlawful assembly they could have been fixed with vicarious liability, in view of: the situation obtaining on
the finding of the High Court, we have no option but to acquit them for the offence under Section 326/149, I.P.C.
Accordingly,  the  conviction  of  accused  11-15,  18,  and  21-27  for  the  offence  under  Section  326/149,  I.P.C.  as
recorded by the High Court and the sentence imposed upon them for the same, are set aside.

34. At this stage we must examine the prosecution case under charges Nos. 1 and 2. Under charge 1, accused 1,
6,  7,  8,  11,  12-15,  19-23,  26  and  27  have  been  convicted  for  an  offence  under  Section  14,  I.P.C.  and  under
charge 2, accused 2, 3. 4, 5, 9, 10, 16, 17, 18, 21, 24 and 25 have been convicted for an offence under Section
148, I.P.C.

35. Before  we  examine  these  two  charges  in  detail  it  would  be  necessary  to  find  out  as  to  when  the  unlawful
assembly was formed, what was the common object of the unlawful assembly and who were the members of this
unlawful assembly who committed the offence of rioting. To substantiate these two charges the prosecution relies
on the evidence of P. Ws. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23 and 24. Before their evidence
is analysed, a very shocking feature of the case which has made the task of this Court much more difficult is the
glaring contradiction in the approach of the High Court. While analysing the prosecution evidence in para. 45, the
High  Court  observes  that  it  agrees  with  the  reasons  given  by  the  learned  trial  Judge  for  disbelieving  the
testimony  of  P.  Ws.  10,  12  and  13,  and  confirms  the  acquittal  of  accused  8,  9,  10,  16  and  17  regarding  the
murderous  assault  on  deceased  Gajarajan.  It  would  be  clear  that  the  evidence  of  P.  Ws.  10,  12  and  13  was
discarded both by the learned  Sessions  Judge and the  High  Court.  However, while appreciating the evidence in
respect of charges Nos. 1 and 2 the High Court has referred to the evidence of P. Ws. 10, 12 and 13 in paragraph



62  of  the  judgment  and  along  with  other  evidence,  has  accepted  the  evidence  of  P.  Ws.  10,  12  and  13.  To  be
frank, this is really incomprehensible and it might indicate the degree of indifference with which the evidence has
been examined in this case while setting aside acquittal of 27 persons and convicting them all.  Even  Mr.  Mulla
learned advocate for the respondent did not invite us to re-examine the evidence of P. Ws. 10, 12 and 13 and,
therefore,  it  will  have  to  be  excluded  from  further  consideration  in  respect  of  charges  1  and  2.  Excluding  the
evidence of P. Ws. 10, 12 and 13, we would briefly refer to the evidence of the remaining witnesses bearing on
the question of charges 1 and 2.

36. It is the prosecution case that deceased Gajarajan alighted from a bus and when he was proceeding towards
his  house,  a  crowd  emerged  from  Casuarina  Thope.  This  crowd  is  witnessed  by  P.W.  1  and  he  refers  to  the
presence of accused 1-23 in this crowd. The next witness in the sequence of events who observed the crowd is
P.W.  16.  Her  evidence  would  show  that  she  had  seen  certain  persons  collecting  at  Casuarina  Thope  as  well  as
Cashewnut  Thope  and  some  of  them  were  armed  with  sticks  and  knives.  Her  evidence  would  show  that  when
Gajarajan  alighted  from  the  bus,  from  Casuarina  Thope  a  group  of  persons  emerged  and  rushed  towards
Gajarajan. According to her Gajarajan was encircled and attacked near the well. She ran away towards her house.
It  is  very  surprising  that  this  witness  does  not  identify  any  one  from  amongst,  the  crowd,  who  encircled
Gajarajan near the well and attacked him.  In fact, in her examination-in-chief she makes it very clear that she
could not notice or see distinctly as to who were all the persons who were present and obstructing and waylaying
the deceased near the well. This is rather ununderstandable because the witness is a resident of the very village
and  she  is  shown,  to  be  38  years  old.  The  evidence  of  this  witness  would  suggest  that  a  large  crowd  had
collected  but,  it  is  not  possible  to  believe  that  all  of  them  were  members  of  the  unlawful  assembly.  It  may  be
mentioned that according to P.W. 1, the deceased was first encircled and attacked near the well. Therefore, P.W.
1 was present at the time of the assault on the deceased near the well. There is evidence of P.W. 17 to the effect
that he heard a commotion emanating from school side and saw a mob consisting of 40 to 50 persons running in
the street. He identified accused 2, 3, 5, 9 and 15 in the crowd. There is also evidence of P.W. 9 that when he
was returning home with his cattle in the afternoon on the date of occurrence he saw  Gajarajan alighting from
the bus and a crowd running from Casuarina Thope and raising alarm 'Pidida', There is evidence of P.W. 8 to the
same effect.  Now, if some persons had  collected  at  one  place  and  on  seeing  Gajarajan  alighting  from  the  bus,
emerged from that place and chased him, and some of them belaboured him, it can be said that they had met for
a purpose and had a common object and acted in concert. Now, if some per-sons combined to attack Gajarajan
and if they emerged together one can say that those who were the members of this assembly shared the common
object  of  the  assembly,  viz.,  to  assault  and  even  to  cause  hurt  to  Gajarajan.  That  at  that  stage  an  unlawful
assembly was formed Is unmistakably established.

37. Mr.  Chitaley, however, urged that the events occurred in two distinct parts, one near the well and another
near  the  house  of  P.W.  10  and  that  there  was  no  correlation  between  the  two;  nor  the  incidents  that  occurred
near the house of P.W. 10 were a continuation of what occurred near the well. In this connection he also urged
that in fact something had happened on that day around 12 noon and therefore, it could not be said that those
who  had  collected  at  Casuarina  Thope  and  Cashewnut  Thope  and  had  emerged  on  seeing  Gajarajan  formed  an
unlawful assembly. He invited our attention on the evidence of P.W. 12 the wife of P.W. 10 who has deposed that
she had heard the noise on that day around 12 noon. This is a very casual statement made by the witness. In fact
nowhere it is suggested that some incident occurred at 12 noon. This submission was sought to be reinforced by
referring to the statement of accused 4 who was injured and was found to be lying at the scene of the occurrence
by the police officer. Accused 4 has stated that he was beaten around 2 p. m. by the members of the crowd 100
strong and amongst them was Gajarajan who caused him injury with a patta knife. The statement of accused 4
stands by itself. There is nothing in the prosecution evidence to lend any assurance to it. On the contrary there is
evidence of number of witnesses to be presently mentioned that it was when Gajarajan arrived that members of
the  crowd  attacked  him.  It  is,  therefore,  not  possible  to  accept  the  submission  of  Mr.  Chitaley  that  something
happened at 12 noon and that at that time the aggressors were the members of the party of P.W. 31. P.W. 4 and
deceased Gajarajan, and that something thereafter occurred at 2.30 p.m. in which possibly Gajarajan got injured.
Further the occurrence was one whole and attack on  Gajarajan which took place at different spots removed by
225 ft. is one and the same transaction. Undoubtedly, therefore, an unlawful assembly was formed by the time
Gajarajan was attacked near the well, but we must administer a caution that at that time the only object of the
unlawful  assembly  discernible  was  to  attack  and  belabour  Gajarajan.  This  seems  significant  because  the  High
Court has convicted accused 1, 2, 4, 5, 19, 23, 24, 25 and 27 for specific acts of assault and in respect of each
such  assault  found  proof.  The  remaining  accused  were  convicted  with  the  aid  of  Section  149,  I.P.C.  meaning
thereby  that  each  such  casual  and  separate  act  of  assault  on  different  persons  was  committed  by  the  specific
accused  as  member  of  the  unlawful  assembly  and  that  the  remaining  members  of  the  unlawful  assembly  knew
that  such  offence  was  likely  to  be  committed.  On  the  facts  of  this  case  we  are  not  disposed  to  draw  such  an
inference for the reasons to be presently mentioned.

38. While examining specific charges against individual accused, it may be mentioned that accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6,  8,  9,  24  and  25  are  being  convicted  for  different  offences  and  their  presence  as  members  of  the  unlawful
assembly is satisfactorily established. Accordingly, agreeing with the High Court, the conviction of accused 1 and
8 for an offence under Section 147, I.P.C. and conviction of accused 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 24 and 25 for an offence under
Section 148, I.P.C., and the sentences imposed upon them for the same are hereby confirmed.

3 9 . Now,  turning  to  the  case  of  the  rest  of  the  accused,  we  would  ordinarily  accept  the  presence  of  those
accused  as  satisfactorily  proved  in  respect  of  whom  at  least  there  is  reliable  evidence  of  three  witnesses  and
while analysing the evidence we would be rather slow to accept the evidence of P.W. 19 standing by itself who,



as we would presently point out, has been materially contradicted by her statement under Section 161, Criminal
P.C. Approaching the matter from this angle, we would briefly set out the evidence. The presence of accused 6 is
consistently spoken to by  P.  Ws. 1, 19, 20 and 24 and that evidence establishes the fact that accused 6 was a
member  of  unlawful  assembly  and  charge  under  Section  148,  I.P.C.  is  brought  home  to  him.  The  presence  of
accused 7 is spoken to by P. Ws. 1, 19 and 20 but P.W. 19 has not referred to the presence of accused 7 in her
police statement and, therefore, the reliable evidence is only of P. Ws. 1 and 20. On the test that we propose to
apply in this case, accused 7 will have to be acquitted. The presence of accused 11 is spoken to by P. Ws. 1, 18
and  21,  and  his  conviction  for  an  offence  under  Section  147,  I.P.C.  and  the  sentence  imposed  for  the  same  is
confirmed, Against accused 12, 13 and 14 there is only evidence of P. Ws. 1 and 21 and we would rather hesitate
to  accept  their  presence  as  members  of  the  unlawful  assembly  and,  therefore,  their  conviction  for  an  offence
under Section 147, I.P.C. and the sentence imposed upon them for the same are set aside. In the case of accused
15, his presence is affirmed by P. Ws. 1, 16, 17 and 18 which evidence is reliable and, therefore, his conviction
and sentence under Section 147, I.P.C. are confirmed. Against accused 19 there is the evidence of P. Ws. 1, 2, 19
and  23  and  so  far  as  accused  19  is  concerned,  P.W.  19  is  consistent.  Therefore,  this  evidence  is  sufficient  to
confirm his conviction and sentence. So far as the case of accused 20 is concerned, his presence is referred to by
P. Ws. 1, 19 and 24 and the evidence of P.W. 19 so far as this accused is concerned is quite consistent and his
conviction  and  sentence  are,  therefore,  confirmed.  In  respect  of  accused  22,  there  is  the  evidence  of  P.W.  1
alone. Similarly in respect of accused 26 there is the evidence of P. Ws. 6 and 21 alone and in respect of accused
27  there  is  evidence  of  P.  Ws.  4  and  21  and  for  the  reasons  hereinbefore  stated,  we  would  hold  that  their
presence is not satisfactorily established, and, therefore, the conviction of accused 22, 26 and 27 for an offence
under Section 147, I.P.C. and the sentence imposed for the same are set aside. There is evidence of P. Ws. 1, 16
and 18 against accused 23 and that evidence Is consistent and reliable and, therefore, the conviction of accused
23 for the offence under Section 147, I.P.C. and the sentence imposed for the same are confirmed.

40. There is the evidence of P. Ws. 1, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 24 against accused 10 but we would not take into
consideration the evidence of P.W. 19 because she is not consistent so far as accused 10 is concerned. Even then
there is sufficient and reliable evidence to affirm the conviction and sentence of accused 10. There is evidence of
P. Ws. 1 and 19 only against accused 16 but P.W. 19 is contradicted by her police statement and, therefore, there
remains the evidence of P.W. 1 alone against accused 1'6 and in the circumstances of the case it would not be
possible  to  confirm  the  conviction  and  sentence  of  accused  16  for  an  offence  under  Section  148,  I.P.C.  His
conviction  and  sentence  for  an  offence  under  Section  148,  I.P.C.  are,  therefore,  set  aside.  Against  accused  17
there is reliable evidence of P. Ws. 1, 2, 8, 19 and 23. Similarly, against accused 18 there is reliable evidence of
P. Ws. 1, 19, and 23 and against accused 21 there is reliable evidence of P. Ws. 1, 6 and 24 and, therefore, the
conviction  of  each  of  them  under  Section  148,  I.P.C.  and  the  sentence  imposed  upon  them  for  the  same  are
hereby confirmed.

4 1 . Turning  now  to  the  specific  charges  of  hurt  or  grievous  hurt  caused  by  specific  accused  to  specific
prosecution witnesses It would be advantageous to specify which charges are held proved by the High Court. The
following chart will bear out the findings of the High Court:

42. Under  charge  7,  accused  1  is  convicted  for  having  caused  a  hurt  to  P.W.  8  Gangappa  Naicker  by  giving  a
blow with a stick on his left shoulder. There is evidence of P.W. 8 to this effect and this evidence is borne out by
the evidence of P.W. 15 Dr. Pragdeeswaran who found an abrasion medial 1/3 of the left clavicle 3" X 1/4 ". An
X-Ray did not reveal any fracture of the clavicle. If a stick blow was given by accused 1 to this witness he would
be able to identify him as the  Incident occurred around 2.30 p. m. in broad day light.  We agree with the  High
Court  that  accused  1  should  be  convicted  for  the  offence  under  Section  323,  I.P.C.  and  there  is  no  reason  to
interfere with the sentence awarded to him.

4 3 . Under  charge  9  accused  2  is  convicted  for  having  committed  an  offence  under  Section  324,  I.P.C.  for
inflicting an injury with a sharp edged weapon like a patta knife on the left calf muscle of P.W. 6 Subramaniam.
P.W. 11 Dr. Ramachandran found an incised wound over the back of left leg (over the calf 5" below the knee),
oblique  6  cms.  X  2  cms.  The  medical  evidence  thus  corroborates  the  evidence  of  P.W.  6  and  this  evidence  is
further corroborated by the evidence of P.W. 1, The High Court has accepted the evidence and we see no reason
to take a different view of the matter.  Accused 2 was, therefore, rightly convicted for an offence under  Section
324, I.P.C. and we confirm the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for six months imposed upon him for the same
offence.

44. Under charge 11 accused 4 is convicted for inflicting different injuries on the head of P.W. 2 Vedagiri with a
sharp cutting instrument like patta knife. There is evidence of P.W. 2 to that effect, P.W. 11 Dr. Ramachandran
examined  this  witness  and  found  as  many  as  14  injuries  on  his  person.  Ext.  P-8  is  the  certificate  of  Injuries.
From amongst these 14 Injuries, injury No. 2 is an incised wound over the left parietal region 4 cms. X 1/2 cm.
Injury No. 4 is an incised wound over the back of left ear 2 X 1/4 cms. and injury No. 1 Is a small incised wound
over the left temporal region 2 cms. X 1/2 cm. This medical evidence would amply corroborate the evidence of
P.W. 2. On this point there is also evidence of P.W. 1 which would render assurance to the evidence of P.W. 2.
The  High  Court  has  accepted  his  evidence  and  we  see  no  reason  to  take  a  different  view  of  the  matter.
Accordingly the conviction of accused No. 4 for an offence under Section 324, I.P.C. and the sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for six months imposed upon him for the same are confirmed.

45. Under charge 13 accused No. 4 is convicted for an offence under Section 324, I.P.C. for causing hurt on the
hand of



_______________________________________________________________________________________
Accused Charge Offence for No. of Weapon No. No. which prosecution used. convicted. witness injured.
________________________________________________________________________________________
l 7 Under Section 323, I.P.C. P W. 8 Stick. 2 9 Under Section 324, I.P.C. P W. 8 Patta kathi. 3 11 Under
Section  324,  I.P.C.  P  W.  2  -do-  4  13  Under  Section  324,  I.P.C.  P  W.  7  -do-  5  17  Under  Section  323,
I.P.C. P W. 1 Stone. 19 19 Under Section 325, I.P.C. P W. 2 Stone. 23 21 Under Section 323, I.P.C. P W.
13 Stick. 24 23 Under Section 324, I.P.C. P W. 4 Patta kathi. 25 25 Under Section 324, I.P.C. P W. 4 Iron
pipe. 27 29 Under Section 323, I.P.C. P W. 4 Stone. 3-10, 15-17, 38 Under Section 427, I.P.C. - - 19-21
&  23.  read  with  Section  324  (Mischiet)  2,  3,  8  &  9  39  Under  Section  427/34,  I.P.C.  -  -
_________________________________________________________________________________________

P.W. 7 by a patta knife. The injury was caused on the left index finger of P.W. 7. There is evidence to that effect
of  P.W.  7.  There  is  also  evidence  of  P.W.  8  to  the  same  effect.  P.W.  11  Dr.  Ramachandran  found  one  incised
wound  on  the  pulp  of  left  index  finger  2  cms.  X  1/4  cm.  The  injury  was  found  fresh  and  was  bleeding,  when
examined by Dr. Ramachandran, The High Court has accepted this evidence and nothing was pointed out to us to
take  a  different  view  of  the  matter.  We  accordingly  confirm  the  conviction  of  the  accused  under  Section  324,
I.P.C. and the sentence of six months rigorous imprisonment imposed upon him.

46. Under  charge  17  accused  5  was  convicted  for  causing  injury  on  the  right  knee  cap  of  P.W.  1  by  pelting  a
stone  at  him.  This  part  of  evidence  is  borne  out  by  the  evidence  of  P.W.  11  Dr.  Ramachandran  who  found  a
contused wound over the inner aspect of right leg, just 2" below the knee, 2 1/2 cms. X 1 1/2 cm. of P.W. 1. In
the opinion of  Dr.  Ramachandran such an injury could be caused by being hit by a stone.  There is evidence of
P.W. 6 to the effect that he saw accused 5 chasing  P.W. 1.  We agree with the  High  Court that this evidence is
sufficient to bring home the charge against accused 5 for an offence under Section 323, I.P.C. and we affirm the
conviction and sentence of accused 5 on this count.

47. Under  charge  19  accused  19  has  been  convicted  for  causing  Injuries  to  P.W.  2  by  hurling  stones  at  him.
According to the evidence of P.W. 2, by the stones pelted at him by accused 19 he was hurt on his left finger,
chest  and  on,  the  knee.  Dr.  Ramachandran  examined  P.W.  2  on  27th  November  1968,  i.e.  on  the  date  of  the
occurrence itself. He found as many as 14 injuries on his person. In the opinion of Dr. Ramachandran injuries 1,
2 and 4 of P.W. 2 could have been caused by a patta knife and the remaining injuries could have been caused by
being hit by stones or other objects. An X-Ray examination of injury 7 being a contusion over the dorsum of left
hand revealed a fracture of the middle left ring finger and in his opinion it was a case of grievous hurt. Now, tone
charge in this case is that the principal attack was directed against  Gajarajan and some members of the crowd
were  pelting  stones.  P.W.  2  has  suffered  as  many  as  14  injuries,  some  with  deadly  weapon  like  patta  knife.  It
also  appears  that  apart  from  accused  19  there  were  others  from  the  mob  who  pelted  stones.  It  is,  therefore,
difficult  to  believe  that  P.W.  2  when  he  was  a  victim  of  simultaneous  assault  by  a  number  of  assailants  and
ordinarily when stones were being pelted from a distance he would be able to identify and say with precision that
a stone hurled by a particular accused caused him a particular injury.  Along with this we have to bear in mind
that  an  omission  was  brought  on  record  with  reference  to  his  police  statement  which  showed  that  he  had  not
stated that a stone hurled by a particular accused caused him the particular injury.  His attempt at specification
and  the  further  attempt  to  attribute  injury  No.  7  to  accused  19  clearly  suggests  an  improvement  and  the
improvement  seems  to  be  motivated,  viz.,  to  attribute  specific  injury  to  accused  19.  At  one  stage  according  to
P.W.  1,  accused  19  was  very  near  Gajarajan  who  had  fallen  in  front  of  the  house  of  P.W.  10  and  was  seen
dropping a stone on his head.  P.W. 2 was at some distance.  Therefore, stones, if at all hurled at  P.W. 2, must
have been from a distance and again  P.W. 1 does not say that he saw accused 19 hurling stones at  P.W. 2.  In
this state of evidence we are not satisfied that accused 19 caused injuries to  P.W. 2 by hurling stones and his
conviction  for  an  offence  under  Section  325,  I.P.C.  cannot  be  sustained  and  it  must  be  set  aside  as  also  the
sentence imposed upon him for the same.

48. Under charge 21 accused 23 was convicted for an offence under Section 323, I.P.C. for causing injury with a
stick to P.W. 13. There is evidence of Dr. Pragdeeswaran to the effect that P.W. 13 was examined by him on 28th
November 1968. The Medical Officer did not find any visible mark of injury but deposed that he found tenderness
over the muscles on the back of  P.W. 13 at that time.  The name of the accused 23 is  Pazhandi  Naicker.  In the
F.I.R. Ext. P-2 it is stated that Pachammal wife of Pazhandi Naicker was having a stone. In his evidence P.W. 1
claimed that he knew Pazhandi Naicker accused No. 23. He also deposed that he had seen accused 23 in the mob
that  chased  Gajarajan  after  emerging  from  Casuarina  Thope.  Now,  it  is  not  made  clear  whether  the  person
referred to by P.W. 1 in FIR, Ext. P-2 as described herein above is the same whose presence he referred to in the
mob.  It  was  rightly  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Chitaley  that  accused  23  is  91  years  old  and  that  P.W.  13  Thirumathi
Kannammal is a woman and if the stick blow was given to a woman, it is difficult to believe that there would not
appear any visible mark of injury.  Therefore, in the absence of medical evidence corroborating the evidence of
P.W.  13,  we  are  not  inclined  to  accept  the  evidence  of  P.W.  13  that  a  blow  was  given  to  her  with  a  stick  by
accused 23. Charge 21 is not thus brought home to accused 23 and his conviction for an offence under Section
323, I.P.C. and the sentence imposed upon him for the same are set aside.

49. We would next deal with the two charges Nos. 23 and 25 together. Under charge 23 accused 24 is alleged to
have  caused  an  injury  to  P.W.  4  with  patta  knife.  Similarly,  under  charge  25  accused  25  was  alleged  to  have
caused  an  injury  on  the  left  hand  of  P.W.  4  with  an  iron  pipe.  P.W.  4  Gnanamurthi  is  a  brother  of  deceased
Gajarajan as also of P.W. 31. P.W. 4 was examined by P.W. 15 Dr. Pragdeeswaran on 27th Nov., 1968 at about.
6.30 p.m. He found as many as 11 injuries on the person of P.W. 4. In his opinion injury No. 1 an incised wound



1" X 2" over the frontal region, could have been caused by a sharp edged weapon and the remaining injuries of
P.W. 4 could have been caused by a blunt weapon depending upon the force with which it was used. His further
opinion is that an X-Ray of injury No. 11 revealed a fracture on the ankle in the lower end of tibia. He has also
produced the certificate of injuries,  Ext.  P-30.  Mr.  Chitaley urged that the names of accused 24 and 25 are not
mentioned in the FIR, Ext. P-2. Accused 24 is the son of accused 11. Now, it is certainly true that the names of
accused 24 and 25 are not shown in the FIR, Ext. P-2 lodged by P.W. 1. But we must remember that witness P.W.
4  is  an  injured  witness.  There  is  also  the  evidence  of  P.W.  6  who  is  an  injured  witness  and  whose  presence
cannot  be  disputed  at  the  scene  of  occurrence.  P.W.  6  lends  assurance  to  the  evidence  of  P.W.  4  against  both
accused Nos. 24 and 25 on the point of causing injuries to P.W. 4. It was again pointed out to us that P.W. 6 is
not a resident of village Karpakkam. That may be so. But his cross-examination does not reveal that he was not
able to identify the accused. The High Court has accepted the evidence of P.W. 4 against accused 24 and 25 and
we are not disposed to take a different view of the matter. Therefore, we would confirm the conviction of accused
24 and 25 under charges 23 and 25 for an offence under Section 324, I.P.C. and the sentence imposed upon each
of them for the same.

50. Under charge 29 accused 27 is convicted for an offence under Section 323, I.P.C. for causing hurt to P.W. 4
by pelting a stone at him. There is the evidence of P.W. 4 that a stone was hurled by accused 27 which caused
hurt on his left leg. Dr. Pragdeeswaran found a minor abrasion over the left leg of P.W. 4 at injury No. 10. P.W. 6
has deposed that he had seen accused 27 having a bag full of stones. But in his examination-in-chief he does not
say that accused 27 hurled a stone and caused hurt to P.W. 4. At some stage in cross-examination as it was of a
rambling  character  there  appears  in  evidence  that  accused  27  did  hurl  stone  at  P.W.  4,  But  an  omission  was
brought on record with reference to his police statement in which he had not stated that accused 27 was one of
the  assailants  of  P.W.  4.  Therefore,  It  could  not  be  said  that  the  evidence  of  P.W.  6  lends  assurance  to  the
evidence of P.W. 4. P.W. 21 tried to refer to the presence of some accused persons but he is not clear whether he
had seen accused 27 in the assembly. In this state of evidence there is evidence of P.W. 4 alone against accused
27  and  if  a  stone  is  hurled  from  a  distance  and  if  he  was  being  attacked  by  other  accused  with  stones,  it  is
difficult to believe that he would be able to say with certainty that It was the stone hurled by P.W. 27 which hit
him and, therefore, the case against accused 27 on this point is not free from doubt. The offence under Section
323, I.P.C. has not, therefore, been brought home to her and her conviction and sentence for the offence under
Section 323, I.P.C. are set aside.

51. Under charge No. 38 accused 3-10, 15-17, 19-21 and 23 have been convicted for an offence under Section
427 read with Section 34 I.P.C. in that all the accused in furtherance of the common intention caused damage to
the pump set belonging to P.W. 31 and his brothers and also caused damage to the zinc sheet shed under which
the engine and the pump set were installed. In this connection the prosecution has examined two witnesses, P.
Ws. 19 and 20. P.W. 19 is the sister of deceased Gajarajan and her daughter Sarasu was married with de ceased
Gajarajan. P.W. 19 has deposed that on the date of the occurrence around 2.30 p.m. her daughter Sarasu came
rushing to her house and told her about a commotion being raised in the village near the school. She asked her
daughter  Sarasu  to  go  to  Royapettah  Hospital  to  inform  P.W.  31  about  the  trouble.  She  then  proceeded  to  the
house of her brother and she saw a crowd demolishing the house of her brother. In the crowd she saw accused 6
armed with an iron rod who rushed at her. She went near the cattle shed. The zinc sheet shed was nearby and in
the shed the engine and pump set were installed. She deposed that she saw accused 3, 8, 9 and 10 damaging the
pump set. Accused 9 threw a big stone on the engine and the pump set and accused 3, 8 and 10 damaged the
pump set by striking the engine with iron rods and sticks. The crowd also caused damage to the zinc sheet shed.
Accused  7  went  inside  the  house.  She  then  stated  that  a  crowd  of  50-60  persons  entered  the  house  and
ransacked the doors, windows, etc In this crowd she recognised accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16 and 17
who were demolishing the doors and windows. She further deposed that she saw accused 5, 19, 23 and 28 in the
crowd. She added that accused 20 and 21 were also in the crowd. She stated that after causing damage to the
house all the accused ran away.  Now, there is evidence showing that the house was ransacked and the engine
and pump set were damaged vide Exts. P-31 and P-32. The question is how many accused participated in causing
the mischief? In the cross-examination she was specifically confronted with her police statement and it transpired
that she had not named accused 6, 3, 8, 10, 9, 7, 2, 16 and 23 In her police statement as being members of the
crowd causing damage to the pump set or the shed. Of course, we must make it clear that the question has been
asked  in  the  most  objectionable  manner  and  it  is  surprising  that  it  was  allowed  to  be  put  in  that  form.  The
relevant portion of the cross-examination reads as under:

It Is not (sic) the following accused alone against whom I allege as having taken part in the occurrence,
to the police when I examined A-1 Muthu Naicker; A-4 Singam, A-15 Narayanaswami, A-21 Muthu, A-20
Govindan,  A-28  Uli;  A-17  Ramalingam,  A-18  Ramakrishnan,  A-19  Rajabathar,  A-5  Raman  as  persons
armed  (with)  pipes,  knives  and  sticks  at  that  time  (The  learned  PP.  concedes  that  the  witness  has
mentioned only the names of aforementioned persons and not others whom the witness implicated along
with these persons in this Court in examination in chief).

5 2 . This  is  the  most  objectionable  manner  of  using  the  police  statement  and  we  must  record  our  emphatic
disapproval  of  the  same.  The  question  should  have  been  framed  in  a  manner  to  point  out  that  from  amongst
those  accused  mentioned  in  examination-in-chief  there  were  some  whose  names  were  not  mentioned  in  the
police statement and if the witness affirms this no further proof is necessary and if the witness denies or says
that she does not remember, the investigation officer should have been questioned about it. The sum total of the
recorded evidence is that the witness has not referred to the presence of accused 6, 3, 8, 10, 9, 7, 2, 16 and 23
in her police statement in the crowd. This omission is very important because she is the only material witness on


this point. The High Court unfortunately has omitted to take any note of this omission. The High Court, however,
observed  that  the  evidence  of  P.W.  19  is  corroborated  by  the  evidence  of  P.W.  20.  P.W.  20  Thirumathi  Rani
Ammal is the wife of P.W. 4 Gnanamurthi, the brother of deceased Gajarajan and P.W. 31. She deposed that she
saw  a  crowd  passing  from  opposite  her  house.  She  said  that  soma  members  of  the  crowd  were  armed  with
weapons and on reaching near the house they entered the house and broke open the windows and doors with the
weapons  with  which  they  were  armed,  She  said  that  accused  9  entered  the  house  and  pushed  out  the  two
electricians  working  in  the  house.  A  grievance  was  made  by  Mr.  Chitaley  that  these  two  electricians  were  not
examined. As we are not satisfied about the evidence in respect of this charge, we are not inclined to attach any
importance to the non-examination of the two electricians. Suffice it to say that they were strangers and would
not have thrown any light on the participation of accused in the occurrence. The witness has stated that she saw
accused 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 in the crowd. She deposed that accused 3, 8, 9 and 10 caused damage to the pump
set.  It would thus appear that witnesses  P.W. 19 and 20 are consistent that accused 3, 8, 9 and 10 were seen
causing damage to the pump set. But it simultaneously transpires that P.W. 19 has not referred to the presence
of accused 3, 8, 9 and 10 in her earlier police statement. The High Court merely made a cryptic statement that
there is evidence of P. Ws. 19 and 20 on this part of the prosecution case and that evidence is borne out by MO.
35 showing broken parts of oil engine,  MO.  36  wooden  pieces  of  the  window,  MO.  37  another  broken  wooden
part recovered from the scene of occurrence. There is no doubt that the house of the deceased and his brothers
was ransacked. There is also no doubt that some damage was caused to the pump set and the engine, but on the
question as to who took part from amongst the big crowd in this nefarious activity there Is lack of consistency
between  the  evidence  of  P.  Ws.  19  and  20,  and  P.W.  19  the  material  witness  is  contradicted  by  her  earlier
statement. If we eliminate accused 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16 and 23 as having not been implicated at the earliest
moment which would show that there was an improvement at the time of the evidence and if the evidence is that
others were merely in the crowd, it cannot be said that charge No. 38 is brought home to the accused who are
convicted. There is a reasonable doubt about the veracity of the prosecution case on this point and the accused
are entitled to the benefit of doubt.

53. Under the last charge  No. 39, accused 2, 3, 8 and 9 have been convicted for committing an offence under
Section 427 read with Section 34 I.P.C. In that these accused along with several others entered the house of P.W.
18, Thirumathi Andal Ammal and caused damage to the tailoring machine, radio, glass almirah and other articles
of  household  furniture.  P.W.  18  deposed  that  a  crowd  came  near  her  house  and  some  of  the  members  of  the
crowd  were  armed  with  knives  and  other  weapons.  She  estimated  the  strength  of  the  crowd  to  be  40  or  50
persons.  She  stated  that  some  members  of  the  crowd  asked  her  whether  her  husband  Vembuli  Naicker  was
available  inside  the  house  or  not  and  then  immediately  the  members  of  the  crowd  entered  her  house.  Among
others, she recognised accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 23. She said that from amongst these accused,
accused 2, 3, 8 and 9 and one Kasi damaged the tailoring machine, radio, glass almirah, etc Some others caused
damage to the doOrs. She deposed that accused 8 enquired whether her husband Vembuli Naicker was available
as he was to be cut to pieces whereupon she ran to the back yard and hid herself behind a bush. Some time after
further  searching  the  house  the  crowd  left  the  house.  MO.  28,  MO.  29,  MO.  30,  MO.  31,  MO.  32  and  MO.  33
evidence the damage to the furniture and the broken pieces recovered from the scene of vandalism. Hers is the
only evidence on this point. There is no Infirmity pointed out in the evidence. If some accused caused damage to
the articles belonging to her in her house in her presence and if the High Court chose to place implicit reliance on
her  evidence  there  Is  no  reason  to  take  another  view  of  the  matter  and  her  evidence  has  been  accepted  only
against accused 2, 3, 8 and 9 who have been convicted for an offence under Section 427 read with Section 34,
I.P.C.  We  agree  with  the  High  Court  on  the  analysis  of  the  evidence  of  P.W.  18  and  confirm  the  conviction  of
accused 2, 3, 8 and 9 for an offence under  Section 427 read with  Section 34,  I.P.C. and the sentence imposed
upon them for the same.

54. Turning now to the charges under heads 4, 8, 10, 12, 14, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26 and 30, it must be pointed out
that under these charges all the accused were convicted with the aid of Section 149, I.P.C. in respect of specific
offences  committed  by  each  Individual  accused  in  the  case  of  one  or  the  other  prosecution  witness.  Without
elaborating we must at once say that in a case of this nature where a large crowd collected all of whom are not
shown  to  be  sharing  the  common  object  of  the  unlawful  assembly,  a  stray  assault  by  any  one  accused  on  any
particular  witness  could  not  be  said  to  be  an  assault  in  prosecution  of  the  common  object  of  the  unlawful
assembly so that the remaining accused could be imputed the knowledge that such an offence was likely to be
committed to prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly. To illustrate, when it is alleged that a
certain accused pelted a stone and caused an  Injury to some one who came within the trajectory of the stone,
could it be said that all other members of the unlawful assembly knew that such an offence would be committed?
We are, therefore, not inclined to sustain the conviction of the accused for charges under heads 4, 8, 10, 12, 14,
18, 20, 22, 24, 26 and 30 and accordingly the conviction of the accused under the aforementioned charges and
the sentence imposed for the same are set aside and they are acquitted of these charges.

55. Summing  up  the  findings  recorded  by  us  under  various  charges,  we  confirm  the  conviction  and  sentence
imposed upon accused 1, 6, 8, 11, 15, 19, 20 and 23 for the offence under Section 147, I.P.C. We set aside the
conviction and sentence of accused 7, 12, 13, 14, 22, 26 and 27 and acquit them of the offence under Section
147. I.P.C.

56. The conviction and sentence of accused 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 17, 18, 21, 24 and 25 for the offence under Section
148, I.P.C. are confirmed. The conviction and sentence of accused 16 for the offence under Section 148, I.P.C. is
hereby set aside and he is acquitted of the charge.



57. The conviction of accused 1, 2, 4, and 5 for the offence under Section 302 read with Section 34, I.P.C. and
the sentence of life imprisonment imposed upon each of them are hereby confirmed. The conviction of accused 3,
6, 7 and 19 for the offence under Section 302/34, I.P.C. and the sentence of imprisonment for life imposed upon
each of them are hereby set aside and each one of them is acquitted of that charge.

58. The conviction and sentence of accused 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27 for the offence
under Section 326/149, I.P.C. are hereby set aside and each one of them is acquitted of the said charge.

59. The conviction and sentence of accused No. 1 for the offence under Section 323, I.P.C. under charge 7 are
here by confirmed.

60. The conviction and sentence of accused 2 under charge  No. 9 for an offence under  Section 324,  I.P.C. are
hereby confirmed.

61. The conviction and sentence of accused 4 under charges 11 and 13 for an offence under Section 324, I.P.C.
are hereby confirmed.

62. The  conviction  of  accused  5  for  an  offence  under  Section  323,  I.P.C.  under  charge  17  and  the  sentence
Imposed upon him for the same are hereby set aside and he Is acquitted of that charge.

63. The  conviction  and  sentence  of  accused  23  for  an  offence  under  Section  323,  I.P.C.  under  charge  21  are
hereby set aside and he is acquitted of that charge.

64. The  conviction  and  sentence  of  accused  24  for  an  offence  under  Section  324,  I.P.C.  under  charge  23  are
hereby confirmed.

65. The conviction and sentence of accused 25 for an offence under charge 25 are hereby confirmed.

66. The conviction and sentence of accused 27 for an offence under Section 323, I.P.C. under charge 29 are set
aside and the accused Is acquitted of that charge.

67. The conviction of accused 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21 and 23 of an offence under Section
427/34, I.P.C. under charge 38 and the sentence imposed upon them for the same are hereby set aside and all
the accused herein mentioned are acquitted of that charge.

6 8 . The  conviction  of  accused  2,  3,  8  and  9  for  an  offence  under  Section  427/34,  I.P.C.  and  the  sentence
imposed upon them for the same under charge 39 are hereby confirmed.

69. The conviction of the various accused by the High Court under charges 8, 10, 12, 14, 18, 22, 24, 26 and 30
for offences under Sections 323, 324 and 325, I.P.C read with Section 149, I.P.C. and separate sentence imposed
upon them for the same are set aside and all the accused therein involved are acquitted of these offences.

70. The substantive sentences are directed to run concurrently.

71. Criminal Appeals Nos. 230 and 238 of 1972, and 97 of 1973 are partly allowed to the extent conviction and
sentence  for  various  offences  hereinabove  set  out  are  set  aside  and  dismissed  to  the  extent  conviction  and
sentences  are  confirmed.  Those  of  the  accused  who  are  sentenced  to  suffer  imprisonment  should  be  given
adjustment for the period they were in prison either as under trial prisoners or as convicts after the High Court
convicted them, according to law.