Appellants: Dakhi Singh

Vs.

Respondent: The State




JUDGMENT



1 . This  is  an  appeal  by  Dukhi  Singh  who  has  been  convicted  by  the  learned
Temporary Civil and Sessions Judge of Allahabad under Section 302, I. P. C. and has
been  sentenced  to  death.  Along  with  the  appeal  there  is  the  usual  reference  by  the
learned I Temporary Civil and Sessions Judge for the confirmation of the sentence of
death.

2. On the night between the 28th and 29th of July, 1953, a mixed train, designated
as Up Train No. 375, while going from Banaras Cantt. Station to Allahabad, stopped
at  Handia  Khas  railway  station  at  10.59  p.m.  On  that  train  there  was  the  Railway
Protection  Police  consisting  of  Kashi  Singh  Havildar  Guard  and  three  constables,
Chingan  Ram,  Deomani  Singh and  Dukhi  Singh the appellant.  Deomani got down at
Katka station for taking water and he had left his rifle together with the cartridges in
the  compartment  which  was  meant  for  the  R.  P.  P.  The  train  left  Katka  station  and
Deomani could not catch it, with the result that he was left behind there.

3 . At  Handia  Khas  Station  Dukhi  Singh  noticed  that  a  person  by  name  Nanka,  who
was  the  servant  of  Karamat  thekedar,  was  standing  near  a  goods  wagon  under
suspicious  circumstances.  Karamat  thekedar  held  a  contract  for  the  collection  of
burning cinders, which he was to remove through the aid of his men from the railway
track  so  that  the  sleepers  on  the  railway  track  may  not  get  burnt.  There  existed
previous complaints of theft at Handia Khas station and there was information at the
Thana that sugar bags were being tampered with from time to time at that station and
in that connection one of the railway employees had been suspended. It was in that
background that Dukhi Singh the appellant thought that the man whom he had found
near  the  goods  wagon  was  a  thief.  He  arrested  him  and  he  took  him  to  his
compartment. In that process Rawil, the engine driver, and one fireman Ram Manohar
pleaded before him that the man was not a thief but was the agent of the thekedar
and he should be let off. Dukhi Singh, however, did not agree and he took him to his
compartment.


The  train  started  from  Handia  Khas  station  at  12  minutes  past  11  in  the  night  and
when it had moved a few steps the arrested man jumped down from the train from its
off side, namely, the left side. As soon as he escaped Dukhi Singh followed him with
the rifle. Kashi Singh, the Havildar Guard, fired a shot from a Very-light Pistol which
he  had  with  him.  It  produced  temporarily  a  flood  of  light.  Dukhi  Singh  chased  the
man. The man came from the front of the engine to the right side of the train. It was
alleged  that  Dukhi  Singh  also  came  from  the  same  direction  and  demanded  as  to
where  was  the  driver  who  had  concealed  the  thief  and  he  further  held  out  that  he
would  shoot  him.  Ram  Manohar  fireman  got  down  from  the  train  and  was  standing
near the footboard of the engine. He is said to have asked Dukhi Singh as to why he
would  shoot  the  driver.  It  was  contended  that  thereupon  the  appellant  shot  Ram
Manohar with his rifle and Ram Manohar fell by the side of the foot-board wounded.
It  was  further  alleged  that  Dukhi  Singh  aimed  the  rifle  at  the  driver  and  the  other
fireman, but meanwhile Havildar Kashi Singh came there, caught hold of the rifle and
disarmed hi m. T h e Assistant Station Master  and  the  Railway  Guard  meanwhile
arrived. It was contended that Ram Manohar told the Guard that the R. P. P. constable
had  shot  him  and,  on  enquiry by  the  railway  guard,  the  appellant  told  him  that  the
driver had harboured the thief and had allowed him to escape and so he shot at Ram
Manohar fireman.

4 . The  Assistant  Station  Master  gave  information  to  the  police  at  police  station  at
Handia  as  well  as  to  the  doctor.  The  Circle  Inspector,  who  was  staying  at  Handia
police station, came along with the sub-inspector of police and some constables and
he took the dying declaration of Ram Manohar at 1.15 in the night, -- Ram Manohar's
condition having been taken to be serious. The Tehsildar of Handia was also informed
and  he  too  arrived  a  little  later.  After  his  arrival,  he  took  down  another  dying
declaration  by  Ram  Manohar  at  1.30  in  the  night.  On  the  basis  of  the  dying
declaration  taken  by  the  Circle  Inspector  Sri  Fida  Husain,  a  first  information  report
was lodged at police station Handia the same night. Ram Manohar was given first aid
in  the  train  itself  and  he  was  later  on  removed  to  the  Colvin  Hospital  at  Allahabad
where he died on 29-7-1953. An inquest was held. The dead body was sent for post-
mortem examination.

5. The post-mortem examination was conducted on 29-7-1953, at 4 p.m. It disclosed
that he had a gun-shot wound of entry, circular in diameter 1/4" x abdominal deep,
blackened on the margin at the right side, 2 1/2" above the umbilicus. There was also
a lacerated wound of exit 2" x 1" x abdomen deep at the back just to the left of third
and  fourth  lumbar  vertebrae.  The  third  and  fourth  lumbar  vertebrae  were  fractured.
The peritoneum was punctured. The transverse colar was also punctured at 2 places.
In the opinion of the doctor who conducted the post-mortem examination death was
due  to  shock  and  haemorrhage  on  account  of  the  injuries  noted  above.  In  his
evidence  in  court  the  doctor  was  further  of  opinion  that  the  bullet  must  have  been
fired from a distance of about 10 or 12 feet or at the most from a distance of within
40 or 50 steps.

6 . The  police  had  taken  the  rifle  in  question  and  it  was  sent  to  the  expert  for
examination. The expert evidence was to the effect that it had been used at the time
alleged by the prosecution.  The police recovered blood-stained earth from the place
of  occurrence,  prepared  the  site-plan  and  after  the  necessary  inquiry  challaned  the
accused.

7. In defence the appellant pleaded that he had been given orders by Havildar Kashi
Singh  to  shoot  at  the  thief  and  that  he  did  so  in  discharge  of  his  duty.  He  further



contended that it was a case of pure accident that instead of hitting the thief he hit
the fireman.

8. The prosecution relied upon Ex. P1 recorded by Circle Inspector Fida Husain, and
also  the  dying  declaration  Ex.  P32  recorded  by  the  Tehsildar  Magistrate.  The
prosecution further relied upon the evidence of Rawil P. W. 3 who was the driver of
the train, Mohammad Nazir Khan P. W. 4 the second fireman on the train, Chingen .
Ram P. W. 19 a constable of the R. P. P. who was on the train, Bharat Misra P. W. 2
the guard of the train, Sri Fida Husain Circle Inspector P. W. 1, Sri R. N. Roy P. W. 24
the Tehsildar Magistrate and certain other formal witnesses. Kashi  Singh the Havildar
Guard of  the  R.  P.  P.  was  examined  by  the  learned  Temporary  Civil  and  Sessions
Judge  under  Section  540,  Criminal P.  C . It  was i n th e evidence o f sub-inspector
Anwar  Ahmad  P.  W.  21,  who  was  then posted  as  station  officer  at  police  station
Handia,  that  in  those  days  there  was complaint at  the  Thana that sugar bags were
being tampered with at  Handia railway station and that in that connection a railway
employee was already under suspension. The anxiety on the  part o f the appellant to
arrest a thief can, therefore, well be imagined. It is not disputed, in fact it was stated
by all the principal witnesses for the prosecution, that after  the train had stopped at
Handia  Khas  station a  man  of the contractor  was  found  near  a  goods  wagon. The
appellant considered that since he was there under suspicious circumstances he may
b e a  thief. Accordingly  he  arrested  him and  while  he  was  taking  him  to  the
compartment meant for the R. P. P. on the train, the deceased along with the driver
of the train  pleaded that the man was  not  a  thief  and  that  he  should  be  let  off. The
appellant did not agree to it. The arrested man was taken inside the compartment and
when the train  moved from the  station  the man jumped  down  the  train  from  the off
side and tried to  escape. H e was followed b y the appellant. Havildar  Kashi Singh  ,
fired  with the  Very-light  pistol. T he appellant chased that man. The  man  who  had
escaped came in front of the train and then turned towards the right side of the train,
and so did the appellant.

9 . The  appellant's  contention  was  that  he  had  been  given  orders  by  the  Havildar  to
shoot at the thief. That contention finds some measure of support from the statement
of Kashi Singh Havilciar, which was taken by Thakur Ram Pratap Singh, the S. D. H.,
Handia,  in  a  magisterial  inquiry  conducted  by  him.  Kashi  Singh,  however,  stated  in
the  Court of  Sessions that although in the magisterial inquiry he had stated that he
had  given  orders  to  shoot,  that  statement  was  not  a  true  statement  and  had  been
given by him under entreaties by the appellant. Whether that order had been given by
him or not does not assume any great importance in the case, because in either event
the appellant could not have been entitled to shoot dead the thief or the fireman, In
this  connection,  it  would  be  necessary  to  refer  to  Section  46,  Criminal  P.  C.  That
section lays down that when a police officer arrests a person and such person forcibly
resists  the  endeavour  to  arrest  him  or  attempts  to  evade  the  arrest,  such  police
officer may use all means necessary to effect the arrest; but this does not give a right
to cause the death of the person unless he is accused of an offence punishable with
death or transportation for life.

In the present case the man who had been arrested was suspected to be a thief. He
could  not  have  been  accused  of  an  offence  punishable  with  death  or  with
transportation for life. Consequently in effecting his arrest after the escape the police
officer  had  not  had  the  right  to  cause  his  death.  Reference  in  this  connection  may
also be made to Sections 76 and 79, penal Code. Section 78 provides that nothing is
an offence which is done by a person who is, or who, by reason of a mistake of fact
and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believe himself to be bound by



law to do it.  Section 79 lays down that nothing is an offence which is done by any
person  who  is  justified  by  law,  or  who  by  reason of  a  mistake  of  fact  and  not  by
reason  of  a  mistake  of  law  in  good  faith,  believes  himself  to  be  justified  by  law  in
doing  it.  Under  these  two  sections,  it  was  not  open  to  the  appellant  to  plead
justification to the extent that he was entitled to shoot the person dead, or by reason
of a mistake to shoot the fireman dead, mistaking him to be a thief,

10. Coming now to evidence, the principal Witnesses in the case are Rawil the engine
driver  find  Mohammad  Nazir  Khan,  the  other  fireman.  Their  statement  in  the  court
below  was  that  after  the  arrest  of  the  agent  of  the  thekedar,  Ram  Manohar  and  the
engine driver were pleading with the appellant that the person arrested was known to
them  and  he  was  not  a  thief  and  that  he  should  be  let  off.  The  appellant  told  them
that they had no business to interfere, and he took the arrested man to the railway
compartment.  The  train  thereafter  started  and  when  it  had  gone  a  few  steps,  there
was  a  shot  from  the  Very-light  pistol.  The  train  was  then  stopped.  Both  these
witnesses stated that thereafter the appellant came from the off-side and turning from
the  front  of  the  engine  came to the right side of the engine; that the appellant said
"where is the driver,  I shall shoot him"; that thereupon  Ram  Manohar fireman, who
had got down from the engine, asked him as to why he should shoot the driver; that
upon  the  appellant  shot  at  Ram  Manohar  with  his  rifle  from  a  distance  of  about  8
paces  and  Ram  Manohar  fell  down  injured.  They  further  stated  that  the  appellant
pointed  the  rifle  towards  Rawil  driver  and  fireman  Mohammad  Nazir  Khan  and  they
concealed  themselves  inside  the  engine  and  escaped.  This  part  of  the  story  did  not
find support from either of the two dying declarations stated above.

In  the  first  dying  declaration  Ex.  P.1,  recorded  by  the  Circle  Inspector,  it  was
mentioned  that  the  constable  of  the  R.  P.  P.  had  told  the  deceased  that  he  had
harboured a thief, whereupon the deceased replied that he had not done so, and that
thereafter  the  appellant  told  the deceased  that  he  will  shoot  him  down,  upon which
the  deceased  retorted  that  why  should  he  shoot  him  down,  and  then  the  fire  was
made. The version of the story given by the fireman and by the engine driver was an
improvement over the story given in the dying declaration itself. In the second dying
declaration  Ex.  P-32,  recorded  by  the  Tehsildar  Magistrate,  no  part  of  that
conversation  had  been  stated.  In  the  second  dying  declaration  it  was  stated  that  a
constable of the R. P. P. came and told the deceased "You are a thief", and he fired
and  the  bullet  hit  the  deceased  on  the  abdomen.  We  find  considerable  difficulty  in
accepting the story told by the fireman and by the engine driver in court, when they
said  that  it  was  a  deliberate  act  on  the  part  of  the  appellant  when  he  shot  at  the
deceased  fully  knowing  that  he  was  the  fireman  and  not  the  alleged  thief.  On  the
contrary,  in  the  dying  declaration  Ex.  P-l  we  find  it  having  been  stated  that  the
servant of the thekedar was standing near the engine when the shot was made. The
second dying declaration  Ex.  P-32 also gives an indication that when the bullet was
discharged the appellant was under the impression that he was shooting at the thief.

11. On  the  question  as  to  the  distance  from  which  the  shot  was  fired,  there  was
some divergence in the evidence. Two of the witnesses said that the shot was fired at
from a distance of about 10 or 12 feet.  The medical evidence was to the effect that
the shooting had been done from a distance of about 10 or 12 feet. The doctor later
on modified that statement and stated that it could have been from within a range of
40 or 50 steps. In the site-plan that was prepared by the investigating officer it was
mentioned that the place from where the appellant fired the rifle was 40 steps away
from the place where the firman fell down dead. We do not know how this factor was
incorporated in the site-plan because we do not find anything in the statement of the

witnesses  to  confirm  this.  At  any  rate,  the  medical  evidence  gives  some  support  to
the suggestion that the firing had been done from a distance of about 40 or 50 steps
at the most. If that computation of distance is accepted as correct, the theory that the
appellant aimed at the alleged thief when he was somewhere near the deceased and
he missed the aim and hit the deceased cannot completely be ruled out.

12. We have next the statement of Sri Bharat Misra, the guard who was on duty on
that train. Sri Bharat Misra refers to an alleged extra-judicial confession made by the
appellant  before  him  almost  immediately  after  the  occurrence.  Bharat  Misra  stated
that the appellant was standing at a distance of 4 or 5 paces from Ram Manohar; that
Bharat  Misra  asked  the  appellant  as  to  why  he  had  shot  at  Ram  Manohar,  and  the
appellant told him that the driver had harboured a thief and had allowed him to run
away  and  it  was  on  that  account  that  he  had  shot  at  Ram  Manohar.  This  statement
might give the impression that it was the deliberate act on the part of the appellant
when he hit Ram Manohar as a measure of retaliation, thinking that Ram Manohar and
the driver of the train had been instrumental in the escape of the alleged thief. That
part  of  the  story  was  not,  however,  confirmed  by  any  of  the  other  witnesses  who
were produced in the case.  Moreover, that alleged extra-judicial confession was not
even put to the appellant when he was examined by the learned Temporary Civil and
Sessions  Judge.  It  is  of  highest  importance  that,  when  a  certain  circumstance
appearing in. the prosecution evidence is to be raised against an accused and certain
inferences  are  intended  to  be  drawn  from  it,  that  circumstance  must  be  specifically
put  to  the  accused  in  order  to  elicit  explanation,  if  any,  from  him.  In  the
circumstances  stated  above  we  are  not  inclined  to  attach  any  importance  to  the
alleged  extra-judicial confession, o f which S r i Bharat  Misra  the  guard  has  given
evidence.

13. From  a  consideration  of  the  totality  of.  circumstances  and  the  evidence  in  the
case  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  after  the  arrested  man  had  escaped  from  the
running train the appellant pursued him with a view to effect his re-arrest and, when
he was not in a position to apprehend him, he fired at him and in that process he hit
the deceased fireman.

1 4 . The  question  then  would  be  what  offence  is  made  out.  We  have  given  our
anxious  thought  to  this  question  and  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  case  would  be
covered  by  Exception  3  to  Section  300  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  That  Exception
provides that culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant,
or aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the
powers  given  to  him.  by  law,  and  causes  death  by  doing  an  act  which  he,  in  good
faith, thinks to be lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his duty as a public
servant without ill-will towards the person whose death he has caused. In the present
case there was no ill-will between the appellant and the deceased. The appellant was
a public servant and his object was the advancement of public justice.  He no doubt
exceeded the powers given to him by law, and he caused the death of the fireman by
doing an act which he, in good faith, believed to be lawful and necessary for the due
discharge  of  his  duty.  In  such  circumstances  the  offence  that  was  committed  was
culpable  homicide  not  amounting  to  murder  punishable  under  Section  304,  Part  II,
Penal  Code.  Our  conclusion,  therefore,  is  that  the  appellant  should  have  been
convicted under Section 304, Part II, instead of under Section 302, I. P. C.

15. For reasons stated above we allow the appeal to this extent that we set aside the
conviction  and  sentence  of  the  appellant  under  Section  302  and  convict  him  under
Section  304,  part  II  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and  we  sentence  him  to  seven years'