

Appellants:Abdul Ise Suleman

Vs.

Respondent:State of Gujarat



ORDER

1. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order of conviction and sentence
passed  by  the  High  Court  of  Gujarat  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.  233  of  1976  on  4/25th
April, 1979 reversing the order of acquittal dated December 23, 1975 passed by the
learned  Sessions  Judge,  Bharuch  in  Sessions  Case  No.  30  of  1975.  Five  accused
persons including the appellant were prosecuted in the said Sessions Case No. 30 of
1975  for  offences  under  Sections  147,  148,  307  and  302  read  with  149  I.P.C.  for
murdering  one  young  boy,  Ayub  Umarji,  aged  10  years  and  injuring  P.W.  9,  Gulam
Musa Mohmed Ismail with gun shot injuries. The learned Sessions Judge was of the
view  that  the  prosecution  case  could  not  be  accepted  because  the  incident  was  not
likely  to  be  witnessed  by  the  prosecution  witnesses  which,  according  to  the
prosecution  had  happened  at  night  and  in  all  probability  the  incident  had  happened
earlier and the boy had died because of a cross fire between two fighting groups.

2 . Against  the  said  judgment  of  acquittal  the  Suite  of  Gujarat  preferred  Criminal
Appeal  No.  233  of  1976  in  the  High  Court  of  Gujarat  against  two  accused,  namely,
Hasan  Ise  Suleman  and  the  appellant  Abdul  Ise  Suleman.  The  State  of  Gujarat,
however, did not prefer any appeal against the other three accused. The complainant
Umarji  Vali  Aslam filed a revisional criminal application  No. 182 of 1976 against all
the  accused  challenging  the  order  of  acquittal  passed  in  their  favour.  Later  on,  the
said complainant did not press the criminal revision application No. 182 of 1976 and
the  same  was  dismissed  for  non-prosecution  and  Criminal  Appeal  No.  233  of  1976
was disposed of by the High Court by reversing the order of acquittal and convicting
the accused No. 1 Hasan Ise Suleman for offence punishable under Section 324 I.P.C.
and sentencing him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year on that count. The
High  Court  convicted  the  appellant  accused  No.  2  for  an  offence  punishable  under
Section  302  read  with  Section  301  I.P.C.  and  sentenced  him  to  suffer  rigorous
imprisonment  for  life.  Against  such  order  of  conviction  the  accused  No.  1  preferred
Criminal Appeal No. 294 of 1979 but in view of the death of the said appellant Hasan
Ise  Suleman,  during  the  pendency  of  this  appeal  before  this  Court,  the  said  appeal
was  dismissed  as  abated.  Criminal  Appeal  No.  289  of  1979  preferred  by  appellant.
accused No. 2 was considered on merits and is being disposed of by this judgment.

3. The prosecution case in short is that on April 14, 1979 at about 5.00 p.m. accused
No. 4 Ibrahim Ismail who was the servant of the other three accused had beaten the



complainant Umaraji's uncle Ahmed Aslam with a shoe as the said Ahmed Aslam also
known  as  Master  had  demanded  one  rupee  from  the  said  accused  No.  4  as  a
contribution for giving water to the bullocks. The complainant after returning from his
field at about 7.30 p.m. came to know about such assault on his uncle and thereafter
he went to Pir Chakla which was adjoining to his house where he met P.W. 9 Gulam
Musa  Mohamed  who  was  an  injured  witness  and  one  Abdul  Haq  the  son  of  said
Ahmed  Aslam.  While  they  had  been  discussing  about  the  incident  of  that  assault  of
Ahmed  Aslatn,  Kalidas  Ibrahim,  P.W.  10,  also  joined  them.  While  they  had  been
talking to Kalidas about the incident, the said persons were near the shop of P.W. 1S,
Ibrahim  and  from  the  said  place  the  house  of  P.W.  4  was  visible.  Kalidas  then
suggested that all of them should go to the house of accused No. 3 because they saw
all the accused persons sitting on the benches of the Otla of the house of the accused
No. 3. The intention of the complainant and his companions was to make a complaint
about the incident of beating Ahmed Aslam with shoe by the accused No. 4 because
accused  No. 3,  Haji  Ise  Suleman, was the head of the family and the master of the
accused  No.  4.  The  prosecution  case  is  that  the  petromax  light  was  burning  at  the
Otla of accused No. 3's house. It is an admitted position that there was no electricity
in the village. The further case of the prosecution is that on hearing the complainant
the accused  No. 3 lost his temper and the other accused person became very much
excited.  The  said  accused  No.  3  then  shouted  at  the  accused  No.  2  Abdul  Ise
Suleman,  namely,  the  appellant  and  asked  him  to  bring  guns  from  the  house.
Accused No. 3 thereafter went to the house and brought three guns and gave one gun
to  each  of  the  accused  No.  1,  and  accused  No.  2  and  the  accused  No.  3  Haji  Ise
Suleman  also  kept  one  gun  for  himself.  Accused  No.  2  gave  a  leather  wallet
containing cartridges to accused No. 1 who distributed the said cartridges to accused
Nos.  2  and  3  and  asked  them  to  load  the  guns.  On  seeing  this  all  the  said  four
witnesses  including  the  complainant  started  running  away  from  the  house  of  the
accused  No.  3.  According  to  the  complainant,  the  injured  witness,  Gulam  Musa
Mohmad,  was  running  behind  them  while  the  complainant  Kalidas  and  Adbul  Haq
were  running  ahead  of  Gulam.  When  the  complainant  reached  the  shop  of  Sadik
Mohmad,  they  saw  Khoda  Gulam,  P.W.  12,  and  Chandu  Bechar,  P.W.  13,  standing
there. According to the complainant, when they started running towards the west on
a  road  leading  towards  a  Khadki  and  while  they  were  crossing  the  Pir  Chakla,  they
heard  a  sound  of  gun  shot  and  while  they  were  standing  in  the  Naveri,  Gulam  the
injured  witness  who  was  following  them  told  them  that  he  was  injured  by  the  gun
shot on his left hand. Immediately thereafter, they heard another sound of gun shot
coming  from  the  direction  of  the  house  of  accused  No.  3  and  thereafter  two  more
sounds were heard by them. A big crowd gathered in front of the house of one Abdul
Mohmed  Vilavati  and  the  complainant  went  near  the  crowd  and  saw  that  his  son
Aiyub  was  lying  there  injured  by  a  gun  shot  on  his  head  and  shoulder  and  on
examining him he found that his son was dead. The police Head Constable from the
village outpost arrived there and he took the complainant to the police station where
he  gave  his  complaint.  The  Head  Constable  thereafter  sent  the  complaint  and  the
injured  person  Gulam  to  Jambusar  Police  Station  with  the  complaint  Ext.  32  and
according  to  the  P.S.I.,  M.K.  Chaudhari,  P.W.  19,  complainant,  P.W.  8,  and  injured
Gulam,  P.W.  9  arrived  at  Jambusar  police  station  at  about  0.15  a.m.  and  the
occurrence report and the offence was registered. The police recorded the statement
of Gulam and sent him to the hospital for medical treatment. The P.S.I, thereafter left
Jarftbusar for village Tankari where the incident had taken place and he reached the
place  at  about  1.30  a.m.  and  the  complainant,  P.W.  8,  showed  to  him  the  scene  of
occurrence.  The  P.S.I,  made  search  of  the  accused  persons  but  they  could  not  be
found in the village. The inquest over the dead body was held at about 2.IS a.m. and


the statement of witnesses Kalidas, P.W. 10, Musa Mohmed,  P.W. 14,  Ibrahim,  P.W.
15, and others were recorded at about 6.45 p.m. Panchnama of the scene of offence
was prepared the next morning. During the search of the house of accused No. 3. a
double barrel gun, Article No. 6, was seized under Panchnama Ext. 21, while nothing
incriminating  was  found  from  the  house  of  accused  No.  4  and  5.  The  statement  of
two  eye-witnesses  Khoda,  P.W.  12  and  Chandu  P.W.  13  were  also  recorded  on  the
same  day.  Ultimately  all  the  five  accused  persons  presented  themselves  before  the
P.S.I.  Jambusar  Police  Station  and  the  accused  No.  3  produced  the  gun  licence,
Article  accused  No.  1  produced  gun  licence,  Article  No.  12,  and  a  combined  double
barrel bridge loading rifle, Article No. 13, and accused No. 2 produced a gun licence
Article  No. 14  and  a  double  barrel  rifle,  Article  No.  15.  All  the  said  articles  were
attached  under  Panchnama.  After  completion  of  the  investigation,  the  accused
persons  were  charge  sheeted  and  they  were  ultimately  committed  to  the  court  of
Sessions.

4. The post mortem was held on the body of the deceased and the doctor noted the
injuries  caused  by  gun  shot  and  the  doctor  gave  his  opinion  that  the  death  was
caused due to the gun shot injuries and such injuries were sufficient to cause death
in  the  ordinary  course.  P.W.  9.  Gulam,  was  also  examined  by  the  doctor  at  about
1.10  a.m.  in  the  very  night  of  occurrence  and  the  doctor  noticed  two  gun  shot
injuries and the said P.W. 9 was treated as indoor patient for five days.

5 . The  High  Court  referred  to  a  number  of  decisions  of  this  Court  and  noted  the
guiding  principles  governing  the  exercise  of  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court
and the duty of the appellate court while dealing with an order of acquittal. The High
Court has indicated that keeping in mind all the well settled principles for deciding an
appeal  against  an  order  of  acquittal,  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  were
taken  into  consideration  by  the  High  Court  and  the  impugned  judgment  was
delivered. A site of the place of occurrence being Ext." 10 was prepared by Musabhai
Valibhai,  P.W.I,  and  he  proved  the  said  site  plan.  The  High  Court  indicated  in  the
judgment  that  all  the  important  spots  in  the  map  had  been  carefully  noticed  by  the
High Court in order to correctly appreciate the evidences adduced in the case. It has
been  noted  by  the  High  Court  that  the  distance  where  the  said  young  boy  had  died
and the house of accused No. 3 was 131 ft. or roughly about 43 to 44 yards only and
the  High  Court  also  noticed  that  all  the  prosecution  witnesses  and  the  accused
persons were present within the circumference of about 100 yards. It also transpired
from the map that there were shops in the locality and the evidences also disclosed
30 that shopkeepers also used to keep petromax lanterns in the shop and there was
hotel in the locality and it also transpired from the evidences that there was petromax
light  even  in  the  house  of  accused  No.  3.  Panchnama  of  the  scene  of  offence  being
Ext. 16 clearly indicates that near Pir Chakla the house of Abdul Mohmed Vilayati was
situated  and  there  was  mud  otla  of  the  length  of  2  1/2  feet  from  the  door  of  his
house. Near that place, there was a pool of blood within an area of half foot. It was
also  indicated  in  the  Panchnama  of  the  scene  of  offence  that  certain  cartridges  and
pellets  were  seized  by  the  police.  It  also  transpires  from  the  Panchnama  that  the
house of other witnesses were also situated near the scene of offence. The High Court
has noted that the complaint, P.W. 8, stated in his deposition that one petromax light
was burning on the otla. He also stated that there was no electric light in the village
and  all  the  shopkeepers  used  to  keep  petromax  lantern.  He  also  stated  that  on
hearing the complaint of these four persons, accused No. 3 lost his temper and all the
accused persons were excited. It has also been noted by the High Court that although
an effort was made in the cross-examination of the said complainant to suggest that
there was enmity between the said complaint and the accused but such suggestion in

the cross-examination was denied by the said witness. The said witness in his cross-
examination stated that although the injured witness Gulam had told him that it was
the gun of the accused No. 1 which caused injuries to the said Gulam but such fact
was not stated by the complainant when he lodged the complainant before the Police
Constable. The said complainant also stated in his cross-examination that Khoda P.W.
12 and Chandu P.W. 13 has told him that they had seen shot from the gun of accused
No.  injuring  Gulam  P.W.  9  and  other  gun  shot  from  accused  No.  2  hitting  his  son.
The  said  witness  further  stilted  that  he  could  not  give  the  details  in  the  complaint
because  he  was  too  excited  and  frightened.  The  complainant,  P.W.  8,  denied  the
suggestion that Khoda P.W. 12 and Chandu P.W. 3 were got up witnesses. The High
Court has noted that the complainant, shortly after the incident, lodged the complaint
before  the  police  and  the  names  of  all  the  witnesses  were  mentioned  in  the
complaint.  The  High  Court  has  also  noted  that  the  deposition  of  the  complainant
tallies with the complaint made by him. The High Court has further founded that P.W.
9 Gulam who was an injured witness also supported the prosecution case. The High
Court has further noted that reading the entire cross-examination of the said injured
witness, it can be noticed that there was no contradiction in his deposition. The High
Court,  after  indicating  the  reasons  in  detail,  has  come  to  the  finding  that  the  entire
evidence  of  the  injured  witness  P.W.  9  is  trustworthy  and  the  witness  has  suited
truth.  The  High  Court  has  also  taken  into  consideration  the  evidence  of  two  eye
witnesses  Khoda  P.W.  12  and  Chandu  P.W.  13  and  according  to  the  High  Court  the
said  eye  witnesses  were  natural  witnesses  and  their  names  were  mentioned  in  the
complaint Ext. 32. which was lodged shortly after the incident. After referring to the
site map, the  High  Court has come to the finding that both the said witnesses were
very  much  present  at  the  shop  of  Sadik  Mohmed  and  the  place  where  the  boy  had
been shot dead was close from the place where the said witnesses were present. The
High  Court  has  noted  that  from  the  evidence  of  P.W.  12,  it  transpires  that  at  the
relevant  time  accused  Nos.  1,  2  and  3  were  holding  guns  and  he  heard  a  gun  shot
being fired from the gun of accused No. 1 and he noticed that Gulam was injured by
that gun shot. He also deposed that after some time accused No. 2 fired his gun and
that shot hit Aiyub who was standing on the otla of accused No. 3 and being hit by
the  gun  shot  Aiyub  had  fallen  down.  The  High  Court  has  held  that  the  evidence  of
P.W.  12  inspires  confidence  and  his  presence  at  the  said  spot,  for  the  reasons
disclosed by the said witnesses, was acceptable. The High Court has also noted that
the  evidence  of  P.W.  12  stands  corroborated  by  the  Panchnama  of  scene  of  offence
inasmuch as the deceased had fallen down just near the house of  Mohmed  Vilayati.
The  High  Court  has  also  noted  that  P.W.  12  had  no  oblique  motive  against  the
accused persons. The High Court has also noted that no contradiction worth the name
could  be  brought  by  the  defence  to  destroy  the  credibility  of  the  said  witness.  The
High Court has also referred to the evidence of Chandu P.W. 13 and has come to the
finding  that  he  was  a  natural  witness  and  his  evidence  also  stands  corroborated  by
the evidence of the injured Gulam and also the evidence of witness No. P.W. 12. The
High Court has noted that although P.W. 13 did not suite before the police that there
was  petromax  light  but  non-mention  of  such  petromax  light  was  insignificant
omission  and  the  substantive  evidence  should  not  be  discarded  for  such  omission.
The  High  Court  has  also  referred  to  the  deposition  of  P.W.  15  Ibrahim  Ismail.  The
shop  of  the  said  witness  is  situated  just  near  Pir  Chakla  and  opposite  to  spot  'B'  in
the map where the young boy had died. It has been noted by the High Court that the
evidence of P.W. 15 has clearly established that at 5.00 p.m. accused No. 4 had given
a  shoe  beating  on  the  head  of  Master  and  at  about  8.00  p.m.  on  the  same  day  he
heard two or three gun shots.

6 . The  High  Court,  has  also  analysed  the  reasons  indicated  by  the  trial  court  for



giving  an  order  of  acquittal  and  after  indicating  its  own  reasonings  the  High  Court
came to the finding that such reasonings of the learned Sessions Judge were against
the weight of the evidences and could not be accepted. The High Court has also held
that the incident had happened at about 6.30 p.m. when the son of the complainant
had died. The complaint was lodged at about 10.30 p.m. It has been held by the High
Court that if the grief stricken rather had lodged the complaint within two hours from
the time of the incident.  It can not be contended that there was unreasonable delay
thereby raising suspicion about cooking up of a raise case. The High Court has also
come  to  the  finding  that  non-mention  of  petromax  light  in  the  complaint  lodged  by
the poor father can be easily explained because the father was under a great shock
and  it  was  quite  likely  that  he  had  omitted  to  mention  about  the  petromax  light  in
that  state  of  mind.  The  High  Court  has  also  come  to  the  finding  that  although  the
accused  No. 2 might have not intended to kill the young boy aged 10 years but the
provisions under Section 301 I.P.C. is clearly attracted in the facts and circumstances
of the case.

7 . In  view  of  the  aforesaid  findings,  the  High  Court  set  aside  the  order  of  acquittal
passed by the learned Sessions Judge and held that accused No. 1 was guilty for the
offence punishable under Section 324 I.P.C. for causing injury to P.W. 9 Gulam with
a  gun  and  appellant  No.  2  was  held  guilty  for  an  offence  punishable  under  Section
302 read with Section 301 I.P.C. for causing the death of the son of the complainant
P.W.  8.  In  that  view  of  the  matter,  the  High  Court  passed  the  sentence  of  life
imprisonment against the appellant.

8 . The  learned  Counsel  for  the  appellant  has  submitted  that  the  prosecution  story
does  not  inspire  confidence  on  the  face  of  it.  It  has  been  contended  by  the  learned
Counsel  that  it  is  unusual  and  not  expected  normally  that  the  complainant  and  his
companions would wait even when the accused  No. 3, a rich and influential man in
the locality, became highly agitated along with other accused persons and ordered for
bringing  guns  from  the  house  to  teach  a  lesson  to  the  complainant  and  his
associates.  In  any  event,  it  is  absolutely  improbable  that  when  actually  three  guns
were brought to the otla of accused No. 3 and wallet containing cartridges were also
brought,  the  complainant  and  his  associates  would  still  wait  there  and  see  the
distribution of cartridges and only thereafter they would leave the place. The learned
Counsel has also contended that it is an admitted position that there was no electric
light  in  the  locality  and  in  the  First  Information  Report  the  complainant  did  not
mention about any petromax light burning in the otla of accused No. 3. He has also
not  mentioned  about  petromax  light  being  used  by  the  hotel  or  other  shopkeepers.
The  mention  of  petromax  light  at  a  later  stage  was  a  clear  embellishment  and  the
learned Sessions Judge was justified in disbelieving the existence of sufficient light in
view  of  petromax  lantern  burning  there.  It  has  been  contended  by  the  learned
Counsel for the appellant that if strong light was not there in the otla of the accused
No. 1 or near about the place where the boy was shot dead and  P.W. 9  Gulam had
sustained  injuries,  it  was  not  possible  for  any  of  the  witnesses  to  see  who  had
actually fired the gun. Admittedly, there were three guns brought from the house and
admittedly  all  the  said  guns  were  loaded.  In  the  aforesaid  circumstances,  unless  it
can  be  clearly  pinpointed  as  to  which  of  the  accused  had  actually  fired  the  gun
causing the death of the said boy, it was not possible to convict the appellant on a
charge of murder.

9 . The  learned  Counsel  has  also  contended  that  when  the  complainant  and  his
associates were running away from the otla being frightened by the fact that the three
gas were loaded by the accused persons, it was not expected that they should try to

look back as to what the accused had been doing. In the aforesaid circumstances, it
would be a natural tendency of the complainant and his associates to run as fast as
possible in order to save their lives. The learned Counsel has submitted that although
the High Court, in its judgment has noticed the guiding principle in dealing with the
order of acquittal by the appellate court, but such principles have not been followed
by  the  High  Court.  The  learned  Counsel  has  submitted  that  the  learned  Sessions
Judge has given very cogent reasons for basing his finding that the prosecution case
could not be established beyond reasonable doubt. According to the learned Counsel
for  the  appellant  such  finding  is  consistent  with  the  evidence  and  the  learned
Sessions  Judge having taken a reasonable view, the  High  Court was not justified to
make  a  reappraisal  of  the  evidence  adduced  in  the  case  for  making  independent
finding  of  its  own  and  to  set  aside  proper  and  reasoned  order  of  acquittal.  The
learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  further  submitted  that  in  any  event,  the  facts
and  circumstances  of  the  case  and  the  depositions  lead  by  the  prosecutions  do  not
establish that the appellant had any intention to commit murder of an innocent boy
aged  ten  years  with  whom  there  was  no  question  of  having  any  enmity  or  any
occasion to take a revenge. Even if from the evidence, it is possible to hold that the
gun shot taken by the appellant ultimately caused the death of a boy, the court must
hold that such death was absolutely unintentional and at best it can be held that such
firing was a rash and negligent action on the part of the appellant. In that event, the
offence committed by the appellant cannot be held to be a murder under Section 302
read with Section 301 I.P.C. as held by the High Court but an offence under Section
304A I.P.C. The learned Counsel has further submitted that if an old man aged about
80 years had been given a shoe beating on the head by accused No. 4 who was the
servant of accused No. 3, there was no occasion for the accused No. 3 to lose temper
if his attention was drawn to such improper behavior of accused No. 4. The learned
Counsel has submitted that the prosecution case was false and the truth was not told
by the prosecution witnesses. He has submitted that the learned Sessions Judge has
rightly  held  that  it  is  likely  that  there  was  some  incident  in  the  afternoon  for  which
two groups had fought and it was only the cross fire a young boy was shot dead and
one  of  the  witnesses  had  sustained  injuries.  The  learned  Counsel  has,  therefore,
submitted  that  the  improper  order  of  conviction  and  sentence  passed  against  the
appellant should be set aside by this Court and the appellant should be acquitted.

10. Such contention is, however, disputed by the learned Counsel for the State and it
has  been  submitted  that  the  prosecution  case  was  fully  established  by  reliable  and
clinching evidences and the offence of murder by the appellant has been proved by a
murder of eye-witnesses. It has been submitted that the High Court has analysed the
depositions of eye-witnesses and has clearly held that the deposition of each of the
eye  witnesses  stands  corroborated  by  the  site  plan  and  medical  evidence  and  such
depositions  are  absolutely  reliable.  The  High  Court  has  also  held  that  P.W.  Nos.  12
and  13  were  natural  witnesses  and  they  had  no  animus  against  any  of  the  accused
persons  and  their  evidences  were  absolutely  trustworthy.  He  has  submitted  that  the
reasonings of the learned Sessions Judge have been token into consideration by the
High  Court  and  by  indicating  very  cogent  reasons,  the  same  has  been  discarded.
Hence,  there  is  no  occasion  to  interfere  with  the  order  of  conviction  and  sentence
passed against the appellant and the appeal should be dismissed.

11. After giving our careful consideration to the respective submissions made by the
learned  Counsel  for  the  parties  and  considering  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the
case  and  evidences  on  record,  we  have  no  hesitation  in  holding  that  the  order  of
acquittal  passed  by  the  learned  Session  Judge  against  the  appellant  was  wholly
unjustified and against the weight of the evidence adduced in the case. In the instant


case, apart from the depositions of complainant and his companions who had been to
the house of the accused No. 3 to lodge protest against the assault made on the said
old man, there are convincing evidences of two independent eye witnesses, namely,
P.W. 12 and 13. In our view, the High Court is justified in holding that P.Ws. 12 and
13 are natural witnesses and their evidences are absolutely reliable and the same get
corroboration  by  the  evidences  given  by  other  eye  witnesses  and  also  from  the
injuries suffered by the deceased and the injured person and the site plan prepared
for the case. The reason given by the complainant for not mentioning the existence of
petromax lantern in the complaint before the police is quite convincing and natural.
The  complainant  has  stated  in  his  deposition  that  he  was  greatly  shocked  by  the
wanton  act  of  killing  of  his  son  and  he  was  also  nervous  when  he  lodged  the
complaint  to  the  police  and  therefore,  he  did  not  mention  the  of  presence  of
petromax  light.  There  is  positive  evidence  that  the  shopkeepers  used  to  keep
petromax lantern and in the otla of the accused No. 1 a petromax light was burning.
In  our  view,  the  High  Court  has  given  very  cogent  reasons  for  holding  that  the
appellant  was  guilty  of  the  offence  under  Section  302  read  with  Section  301  I.P.C.
The gun was not fired in the air just to frighten the complainant and his companions
but the gun was fired by the appellant towards fleeing persons even when by the first
shot  one  of  such  persons  was  injured.  Such  firing  was  resorted  in  a  locality  where
there  were  number  of  shops.  Accordingly,  the  provision  of  Section  301  I.P.C.  is
clearly  attracted  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case.  We,  therefore,  find  no
reason to take a contrary view in the case and to upset the well reasoned judgment of
the High Court convicting the appellant. The appeal, therefore, fails and is dismissed.
The  appellant  was  released  on  bail  during  the  pendency  of  the  appeal.  He  should,
therefore, be taken into custody to serve out the sentence.

