Jaswantray Manilal Akhaney vs State Of Bombay on 10 September, 1954


JUDGMENT Dixit, J.

1. This criminal application raises a question under Section 403(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. In order to appreciate the question raised, it is necessary to mention facts relevant to the
determination of the question.

2. The applicant was a director of an insurance company which will, for brevity's sake, be called the
"Union Life Insurance Company." On March 31, 1949, the applicant made a return, as required by
Section 28 of the Insurance Act, 1938. It appears that an administrator took charge of the affairs of
this company, he having been appointed by the Central Government. If the return made is a false
return, the consequence is to be found in Section 104 of the Act, which provides that "whoever, in
any return, report, certificate, balance-sheet or other document, required by or for the purposes of
any of the. provisions of this Act, wilfully makes a statement false in any material particular,
knowing it to be false, shall be punishable" as mentioned in that section. There was a
recommendation made that the applicant should be prosecuted under Section 104.

Now, in the case of a prosecution by or at the instance of the Controller, no sanction of the
Advocate-General is necessary. But where the proceedings are to be started not at the instance of the
Controller but at the instance of an administrator, then Section 107 (1), so far as material, provides
that;

"Except where proceedings are instituted by the Controller no proceedings under this Act against an
insurer or any director, manager or other officer of an insurer or any person who is liable under
Sub-section (2) of Section 41 shall be instituted by any person unless he has previous thereto
obtained the sanction of the Advocate-General of the State where the principal place of business in
the States of such insurer is situate to the institution of such proceedings....."

3. Inasmuch as the proceedings were to be started by the administrator, sanction of the Advocate
-General was applied for and was obtained on May 23, 1951, and pursuant to this sanction, a
complaint was filed against the applicant on May 26, 1951, under Section 104. That case was tried by
Mr. M. J. Gordhandas presiding over the 19th Court, Bombay, and on March 12, 1953, the learned
Magistrate made an order in favour of the applicant holding that the applicant was entitled to an
acquittal principally and upon the only ground that the sanction for the prosecution of the applicant
was bad in law.

4. Thereafter the administrator applied for fresh sanction and the Advocate-General having given
such a sanction, a fresh complaint was filed against the applicant under Section 104, & the
contention taken on his behalf in the Court below was that having regard to Section 403(1) of the
Criminal Procedure Code, a second prosecution could not go on against the applicant. That plea was

I

repelled by the learned Magistrate who considered that the plea had no substance and in the end he
held that the accused was not entitled to the protection afforded by Section 403 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. It is the correctness of this order which Mr. Lulla for the applicant has challenged
in this revisional application. The contention taken on behalf of the applicant is that, inasmuch as
there was an order of acquittal in favour of the applicant by a judgment dated 12-3-1953, the
applicant cannot be prosecuted a second time for the same offence viz. under Section 104.

5. Section 403(1) provides that:

"A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence and convicted
or acquitted of such offence shall, while such conviction or acquittal remains in force, not be liable to
be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts for any other offence for which a different
charge from the one made against him might have been made under Section 236, or for which he
might have been convicted under Section 237."

Now, the principle underlying Section 403 is clear and cannot admit of any doubt or difficulty.
Shortly stated, the principle is that a person once convicted or acquitted cannot be tried for the same
offence. The idea underlying the principle is that a person can be prosecuted only once in respect of
a particular offence and when that prosecution ends either in the conviction or in the acquittal of an
accused person, it must receive a finality as all proceedings must.

Mr. Lulla contends that in this case inasmuch as there is a finding in his favour which is one of
acquittal, a second prosecution is nothing but an harassment to his client and the principle of
Section 403 (1) must obviously apply: In support of this contention he relies upon a decision of their
Lordships of the Privy Council reported in --'Yusofalli Mulla v. King (A). Incidentally, it may be
mentioned that -- "Yusof-alli's case (A)' is a case which went on appeal to their Lordships of the
Privy Council from a decision of this Court reported in -- 'Emperor v. Yusofalli Noorbhai', AIR 1948
Bom 153 (B). Now, -- 'Yusofalli's case (A)' was one which arose under the Hoarding and Profiteering
Prevention Ordinance, 1943.

The appellant before their Lordships of the Privy Council was charged in the Court of the Presidency
Magistrate, 6th additional Court, under Section 13(1) read with Section 5 of the Ordinance and the
offence alleged against the appellant was one of hoarding. The trial of the appellant ended in the
acquittal of the appellant before the learned Magistrate. It is to be noted that the Government of
Bombay did not appeal against the order of the learned Magistrate acquitting the appellant, but it
appears that on 10-4-1946, a fresh sanction to prosecute the appellant was obtained from the
Government of Bombay, and on April 13, a fresh prosecution was instituted against the appellant for
the same offence and on the same facts as in the former prosecution.

On 16-9-1946, the learned Magistrate acquitted the appellant, relying upon Section 403, and then
the Government of Bombay appealed from the order of acquittal and this Court by its judgment
reversed the order of acquittal made by the learned trial Magistrate and directed that the
prosecution should go on as against the appellant. From the order made by the High Court the
accused-appellant went to the Privy Council and the Privy Council had to consider the effect of


Section 403.

A part of the head-note of that case runs as follows:

"Where a person charged with an offence punishable under the Hoarding and Profiteering
Prevention Ordinance, 1943, is acquitted on the ground that his trial was invalid for want of a proper
sanction under Clause 14 of the Ordinance, he can be tried again for the same offence, after a valid
sanction is obtained, for Section 403 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898, has no application to
such a case."

6. Now, the facts of that case are clear. The learned trial Magistrate acquitted the appellant because
of a previous order of acquittal made by the Magistrate, having regard to Section 403. The High
Court, upon appeal, reversed the decision of the learned trial Magistrate and held that a second
prosecution could be instituted against the appellant and the Privy Council confirmed the order
made by the High Court. It is obvious that the actual decision is against the contention raised by Mr.
Lulla on behalf of the applicant. Now, there was an order of acquittal made by the learned trial
Magistrate and it was this order which was set aside by the High Court and which was confirmed by
the Privy Council, notwithstanding Section 403. If, therefore, Mr. Lulla's argument is based upon
the decision of their Lordships of the Privy Council in -- 'Yusofalli's case (A)', there is no substance
in this contention.

But Mr. Lulla argues that in the Privy Council case a contention was raised on behalf of the appellant
and that contention was that the learned Magistrate should have adjudicated upon the validity of the
sanction but had not so adjudicated upon the validity of the sanction. This contention is to be found
at pp. 266-267 of the report. Now, I have read the judgment in vain to find out whether the Privy
Council have given their opinion upon this contention and Mr. Lulla concedes --and I think very
properly -- that the Privy Council have not decided this contention. It is clear, therefore, that there is
no decision in favour of Mr. Lulla's contention and in regard to the contention raised there is no
observation or 'dicta' of the Privy Council to support the contention of Mr. Lulla.

Therefore, Mr. Lulla was driven to the position that although the actual Privy Council decision was
not in his favour and although there was no 'dicta' or observation in his favour, the Privy Council
have left the question open. If the Privy Council have left the question open, it seems to me that
there is no decision in his favour. In my view, therefore, there is no decision which sup ports Mr.
Lulla's contention that there should not be a second prosecution in this case instituted against the
applicant.

7. But Mr. Lulla says that if one has regard to what happened in the Court of the Presidency
Magistrate, 19th Court, it will be clear that there was a valid sanction and it was wrong of the learned
Magistrate of the 19th Court to hold that the sanction was invalid. Now, a reference to the judgment
of the learned Magistrate of the 19th Court shows that the sanction given by the Advocate-General
was in the following terms:


"I have received your letter of the 1-5-1951 and on perusal of the contents, I hereby grant you
sanction under Section 107, Insurance Act to institute proceedings against the persons responsible
for the offence under Section 104 of the same Act."

It was this sanction which was produced to support the prosecution under Section 104 in the former
proceeding. With respect to this sanction, the learned Magistrate said:

"The wording in the sanction shows that proceedings were to be instituted against persons
responsible for the offence under Section 104 of the same Act. Therefore, the sanctioning authority
authorised Mr. G. N. Pradhan, the administrator, to select according to his own discretion persons
who have to be proceeded against. It was the function of the sanctioning authority and not of Mr.
Pradhan. The sanction, therefore, is bad in law."

It is, therefore, clear that the former prosecution failed and the applicant was acquitted because the
sanction which was a condition precedent to the prosecution of the accused-applicant was bad in
law. Now, Mr. Lulla says that we should go into the question about the validity or otherwise of the
sanction given by the Advocate-General in the former proceeding. Speaking with considerable
hesitation but quite frankly, I could not appreciate the point raised by Mr. Lulla. Upon the materials
placed before the Presidency Magistrate, he came to the conclusion that the sanction was invalid
and what Mr. Lulla is trying to do is to ask us that we should ourselves find whether or not that view
was right. In the first place, we are not hearing an appeal from the order made by the Presidency
Magistrate. In so far as the learned Magistrate took the view that the sanction was invalid, it was a
final view of his which resulted in the acquittal of the applicant, and it seems to me that in the
absence of ''dicta' to support the contention of Mr. Lulla, we are not prepared to agree with Mr. Lulla
that we should go into the question about the validity or otherwise of the sanction given by the
Advocate-General in the Conner proceeding. To repeat once again, in the first' place, we are not
hearing an appeal from that order, and in the second place, we cannot now consider the materials
upon which that view was based. It seems to me, therefore, that the view which was taken by Mr.
Gordhandas was final and the basis of the decision was that in the absence of a valid sanction the
prosecution must fail and the prosecution tailed and it ended in the acquittal of the applicant.

8. J Mr. Lulla then contends that even if Section 403 does not apply, the principle of Section 403
should be applied to this case and in this connection he relies upon a decision of this Court reported
in - 'Emperor v. Anant Narayan', AIR 1945 Bom 413 (C). It is quite true that although Section 403
may not, in terms, apply to the facts of a particular case, , the principle of Section 403 may be
applied to the facts of that particular case. But the case upon which Mr, Lulla relies is clearly
distinguishable. There was in that case no question of any sanction to support the prosecution. What
happened was that the accused in that case who was a Kulkarni had misappropriated a certain
amount belonging to Government which he later on paid. He was then charged with offences
punishable under Sections 409 and 466, Penal Code, in respect of two items out of the amount
misappropriated by him and the trial was held before a Sessions Judge who agreed with the
unanimous verdict of the jury and acquitted the accused.



There was then a fresh trial in respect of certain other items of the amount misappropriated by the
accused and what this Court held was that although the plea of 'autrefois acquit' under Section 403
was not technically available to the accused, the principle of it was available to him in the interests
of justice. Now, in the present case the applicant was prosecuted for an offence under Section 104
and in view of the invalid sanction to support that prosecution, he was acquitted. Now, a valid
sanction has been accorded and the accused is being prosecuted. In these circumstances, I find no
analogy between -- 'Anant Narayan's case (C)' and the present case.

In my view, therefore, the principle of Section 403 cannot, in the interest of justice, be applied to the
facts of this case. Mr. Lulla then raised the question that the learned Magistrate has recorded certain
findings in connection with the offence which the accused had been charged with and he says that in
view of those findings the learned Magistrate who will now deal with the case under Section 104 may
be prejudiced, having regard to those findings. Obviously, the learned Magistrate who will deal with
the present case will have to decide the case in accordance with the evidence as will be led in the
case. But Mr. Lulla says that Magistrates arc human as all men in the world are human and he will
be unknowingly influenced by what has been recorded against the applicant in the former case. If a
Magistrate is human, nobody can and, need find fault with him. But in so far as the Magistrate will
not decide the case in accordance with the evidence which will be led, one may have to find fault
with him, but that stage has not yet arrived and the contention is, in my view, premature.

9. Then Mr. Lulla contends that once the Advocate-General has accorded a sanction in the former
proceeding, he cannot give a sanction a second time to support the prosecution under Section 104. It
seems to me that this is an entirely futile contention. There is nothing in Section 107 to support this
contention." If the Advocate-General made a mistake in not according a proper sanction to support
the first prosecution, I fail to see why he should not be able to give a proper sanction to support a.
second prosecution. If it is human to be influenced by the findings of a Magistrate, it is, I think,
equally human to make a mistake, and, if the Advocate-General made a mistake in the first instance,
there is no reason why he should not rectify the mistake and give a proper sanction to support the
present prosecution.

10. I think, the true view is that if a Court has jurisdiction to try an accused person in respect of a
particular offence and the Court makes an order of acquittal in his favour, the order of acquittal,
even if wrong, will bar a second prosecution for the same offence and Section 403 will apply. If,
however, the Court has no jurisdiction to try the accused in respect of a particular offence and it
makes an order of acquittal, the acquittal cannot bar a second prosecution and Section 403 will not
apply. In the present case, the order of acquittal made in the former proceeding was based upon the
view that the sanction to support the prosecution was bad in law. It is obvious that we cannot now
examine the correctness or otherwise of that view. The existence of a valid sanction being a
condition precedent to the existence of jurisdiction, the case is, therefore, one of want of jurisdiction
and the order of acquittal is void and is of no effect. In such a case Section 403 cannot apply.

 11. For   all   these   reasons,   we   think   the   view
taken   by   the   learned   Magistrate   is   right.    The

application,   therefore,   fails   and  the  rule  will be
discharged.  

 12. Application  dismissed.  


