

Appellants:Pawan Kumar

vs.

Respondent:State of Haryana



JUDGMENT

1. The appellants, charged for the offences under Sections 306 498A 201 and 193 of
the  Indian  Penal  Code,  were  found  guilty  of  offences  by  the  Additional  Sessions
Judge Kurukshetra under Sections 306 and 498A of the Code and were sentenced to
undergo R.I. for six years. The High Court though dismissed the appeal qua appellant
No.  1,  Pawan  Kumar  but  as  regards  the  appellant  Nos.  2  and  3,  sentences  were
reduced to six months under both counts respectively and it is this order of dismissal
which is under challenge before this Court in the appeal by the grant of special leave.

2. Before adverting to the rival contentions, be it noted that the entire matter hinges
on  circumstantial  evidence.  There  is  also  however  existing  on  record,  a  dying
declaration,  but  its  effect  on  the  matter,  shall  be  discussed  shortly  hereafter  in  this
judgment. Incidentally  success  of  the  prosecution  on  the  basis  of  circumstantial
evidence will however depend on the availability of a complete chain of events so as
not  to  leave  any  doubt  for  the  conclusion  that  the  act  must  have  been  done  by  the
accused  person.  While  however,  it  is  true  that  there  should  be  no  missing  links,  in
the chain of events so as far as the prosecution is concerned, but it is not that every
one of the links must appear on the surface of the evidence, since some of these links
may  only  be  inferred  from  the  proven  facts.  Circumstances  of  strong  suspicion
without  however  any  conclusive  evidence  are  not  sufficient  to  justify  the  conviction
and it is on this score that great care must be taken in evaluating the circumstantial
evidence. In any event, on the availability of two inferences, the one in favour of the
accused must be accepted and the law is well settled on this score, as such we need
not  dilate  much  in  that  regard  excepting  however,  noting  the  observations  of  this
Court in the case of State of U.P. Vs. Ashok Kumar Srivastava MANU/SC/0161/1992 :
[1992]1SCR37 wherein this Court in paragraph 9 of the report observed:-


"The  Court  has,  time  out  of  number,  observed  that  while  appreciating
circumstantial  evidence  the  Court  must  adopt  a  very  cautious  approach  and
should  record  a  conviction  only  if  all  the  links  in  the  chain  are  complete
pointing  to  the  guilt  of  the  accused  and  every  hypothesis  of  innocence  is
capable  of  being  negatived  on  evidence.  Great  care  must  be  taken  in
evaluating circumstantial evidence and if the evidence relied on is reasonably
capable  of  two  inferences,  the  one  in  favour  of  the  accused  must  be
accepted.  The  circumstance  relied  upon  must  be  found  to  have  been  fully
established and the cumulative effect of all the facts so established must be
consistent  only  with  the  hypothesis  of  guilt.  But  this  is  not  to  say  that  the
prosecution must meet any and every hypothesis put forward by the accused
however  far-fetched  and  fanciful  it  might  be.  Nor  does  it  mean  that
prosecution evidence must be rejected on the slightest doubt because the law
permits rejection if the doubt is reasonable and not otherwise. ........"

3 . The  other  aspect  of  the  issue  is  that  the  evidence  on  record,  ascribed  to  be
circumstantial, ought to justify the inferences of the guilt from the incriminating facts
and circumstances which are incompatible with the innocence of the accused or guilt
of  any  other  person.  The  observations  of  this  Court  in  the  case  of Balwinder  Singh
Vs.  State  of  Punjab  MANU/SC/0160/1986  :  1987CriLJ330  lends  concurrence  to  the
above.

4 . Referring  to  the  prosecution  case  at  this  stage  it  appears  that  Ekta,  the  sister  of
Sudarshan Kumar was married to Pawan Kumar appellant No. 1. After four months of
the  marriage,  Ekta  went  to  Sudarshan  Kumar  alongwith  her  husband  Pawan  Kumar
and told him that a sum of Rs. 10,000/- was being demanded by Pawan Kumar, his
father  and  mother.  Sudarshan  promised  to  pay  that  amount  after  a  couple  of  days
after  arranging  for  it.  Accordingly,  three  days  thereafter  Sudarshan  accompanied  by
one Jag Pal Saini went to the house of the accused at Shahbad and paid the amount
of Rs. 10,000/- to Smt. Kaushalya Devi. After about one year, Ekta again came to the
house of Sudarshan with a definite grievance about being pestered for money by her
husband and parents-in-law.  At that time, she stayed at the house of  Sudarshan for
eight months and never wanted to go back by reason of consistent harassment with
beating. As a matter of fact, a feeling of being fed up together with despondency has
completely over-powered her. Subsequently, a panchayat was held and at the asking
of village Panchayat, Sudarshan agreed to send and did send Ekta with Ram Asra to
the  house  of  her  parents-in-law  at  Shahbad.  However,  the  appellants  continued
harassing  Ekta for dowry.  Sudarshan came to know of this fact whenever he visited
Ekta at Shahbad and as and when she came to meet her parents at karera Khurd. It is
further  the  case  of  the  prosecution  that  about  two  months  prior  to  the  occurrence,
Sudarshan  booked  a  maruti  van  for  himself  and  appellant  Pawan  Kumar  came  to
know about it. He went to the house of Sudarshan and told him that either the said
van  be  given  to  him  or  he  may  book  another  van  for  him.  Sudarshan  however,
refused  to  accede  to  the  demand.  Pawan  Kumar  went  back  leaving  the  impression
that it would not bring  good  result.  On  17.9.1985,  Sudarshan  received  a  telephonic
message  that  Ekta  was  burnt.  Sudarshan,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Krishan  Lal,  Sham
Sunder  and  mother  of  Ekta  went  to  Shahbad.  On  reaching  Shahbad,  they  came  to
know  that  Ekta  had  been  taken  to  P.G.I.,  Chandigarh  by  the  accused.  Sudarshan
along with his companions reached P.G.I., Chandigarh and found that Ekta had died.
He took the dead body and brought it to Shahbad and lodged a report to the police.
The report was recorded by ASI Fateh Singh and he took up the investigation of the
case. He reached at the spot. At that time, the kitchen of the house was locked and
one ASI was put on guard. The dead body along with the inquest report was sent for

                                                                             

post  mortem  examination.  On  the  next  day,  the  spot  and  the  dead  body  were  got
inspected  by  the  team  summoned  from  Forensic  Science  Laboratory,  Madhuban.
Thereafter,  the  ASI  inspected  the  spot  himself  and  prepared  a  rough  site  plan.  He
took  into  possession  certain  articles,  which  were  sealed.  The  statements  of  other
witnesses  were  recorded.  The  appellants  were  arrested.  On  the  completion  of
investigation,  challan  was  filed.  Thereafter  the  case  was  committed  to  the  Court  of
Sessions where the learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  tried  it  and  the  conviction  as
above was made by him.

5 . Incidentally,  the  defence  has  also  led  evidence  to  show  that  Ekta  died  of  an
accident and not a suicidal death and on this score strong reliance was placed on the
dying  declaration  by  Ekta  made  before  the  Police  Officer.  Though,  however,  dying
declaration is stated to be a got up document and not worth even the paper on which
it was written. The same is however noted herein below.

"I  was  married  with  Pawan  Kumar  S/o  Ram  Asra  caste  Arora  R/o  Sainda
Mohalla, Shababad about 4-5 years before. My husband is cloths dealer and
his  shop  is  situated  in  Main  Bazar  Shahabad.  We  live  together  with  our
parents-in-law.  Today  in  morning  at  about  8.30  AM  my  husband  and  my
father-in-law Ram Asra had already been gone at shop and my mother-in-law
Smt.  Kaushalaya  Devi  also  had  gone  to  the  house  of  neighbour  for  visit.  I
was alone at house. Today at about 10 AM I was boiling the Milk in Kitchen
on a stove kerosene Oil was finished from the stove. It had taken a bottle of
kerosene  oil  which  was  lying  in  kitchen  for  filling  up  in  stove.  Then  that
bottle of kerosene oil fell down from my hands and broken. The kerosene oil
from  the  bottle  fell  upon  my  cloths  and  on  the  burns  stove,  so  that  reason
my cloths get on fire on this I started crying on this a number of persons and
women  came  to  the  spot.  They  put  off  the  fire  from  my  clothes  and  from
body.  Later  on  my  husband  reached  there.  I  was  brought  in  Civil  Hospital
Shahabad  for  treatment.  This  fire  set  on  due  to  broken  the  bottle  of
kerosene. No body have fault in this matter. This fire was put on by chance
and not I had put on fire by anybody. Statement heard and it is correct.

6 . Mr.  Sushil  Kumar,  learned  Senior  Advocate  contended  that  the  sole  issue  in  the
matter  under  consideration  is  whether  the  death  of  Ekta  can  be  ascribed  to  be  an
accidental death or a case of suicide? Needless to record that the High Court negated
the case of accidental death and held the appellants guilty of abetment to the act of
suicide and it is on this count that the appeal of the appellant No. 1 before the High
Court was rejected whereas the two other appellants had their sentences reduced.

7. In support of the appeal it has rather emphatically been contended that the dying
declaration  itself  would  negate  any  suicidal  act,  but  depicted  a  clear  accidental
incident  resulting  in  the  death.  It  is  this  dying  declaration  which  the  learned  Trial
Judge,  as  also  the  High  Court  ascribed  it  to  be  not  worth  the  paper  on  which  the
same  was  written  and  does  not  deserve  the  credence  of  acceptance  of  the  same.
Peculiarities are the ways which can however, easily be noticed: The kerosene on the
stove  got  finished  as  a  result  of  which  further  filling  of  kerosene  was  required  and
                                                                            

hence a bottle was taken, which accidentally slipped out and broken. But the factum
of the stove not having any kerosene, has been ignored, since absence of kerosene
would  put  off  the  ignition  and  there  would  be  total  extinguishment  of  fire:  The
resultant effect of such an extinguishment mean and imply that one would require a
match stick to ignite the kerosene- since there is no automatic flow of fire available.
The  fact,  Ekta  died  of  burn  injuries  stands  admitted  which  has  been  stated  to  be
accidental and not suicidal. It is on this score however, the prosecution laid evidence
to depict that the accident could not have happened as stated in the dying declaration
and it has been an evidence created to cover up the suicide. Strong reliance has been
placed  on  the  evidence  of  Senior  Scientific  Officer  Shri  J.L.  Gaur  (PW.2)  who  in  no
uncertain terms ruled out any accidental burn injury in the matter. On an examination
of  the  body  it  was  observed  that  a  part  of  the  scalp,  hair  on  the  top  of  head  eye
brow, eye lashes and public hair were burnt and singed. However hairs on the sides
and back of the head had escaped any injury. The body was burnt practically all over
excepting  the  feet  and  their  soles.  Three  kerosene  stoves  were  available  in  the
kitchen, two being with sufficient fuel for use and the other one lying totally idle in
another  corner  of  the  room  with  accumulation  of  dust  on  them.  In  any  event,  the
third stove lying in the other corner was not having even a smell of kerosene. Pieces
of  broken  glass  bottle  with  no  smell  of  kerosene  were  available  in  the  kitchen  and
one of the bottom piece of bottle had fungus like deposit clearly indicating non user
of the bottle as a container of kerosene for quite sometime. Significantly, there was a
match  box,  a  broken  match  box  lying  on  the  floor  at  a  distance  of  about  four  feet
from  the  stove.  The  used  sticks  of  match  box  were  available  near  the  stove.  The
match box emitted smell of kerosene. PW.2 has also spoken of non-availability of any
milk  or  milk  container  even  in  the  kitchen.  The  further  finding  of  PW.2  is  that  both
the  stoves  were  in  working  condition  and  the  air  pressure  valves  of  the  stove  were
found  in  open  position  having  the  lids  of  the  tanks  of  the  stove  dry  and  tightly
closed. PW 2 further spoke of an unused funnel lying on the floor of the room which
also did not have any kerosene smell.

8. It is for reasons as above that learned Sessions Judge and the High Court refused
to put any credence on the defence of accidental burn injury. If the accidental injury
is ruled out and which we also feel the same way as that of the other two Courts, the
obvious  conclusion  would  be  suicidal  death  and  on  that  issue  a  further  question
arises  as  regards  abetment.  An  analysis  of  the  evidence  of  PW.3,  Sudarshan  Kumar
(brother of the deceased) depicts the behavioral pattern received at the in-laws place
by  Ekta.  Occasional  demand  for  money  and  failure  to  meet  the  same,  however
resulted in beating up of the girl, Ekta, and as a matter of fact in September 1985 she
came  back  to  the  house  of  complainant  all  alone  and  this  arrival,  the  complainant
described  as  the  aftermath  of  torture  which  in  fact  did  put  her  up  in  a  bad  shape.
Definite  evidence  is  available  on  record  that  Ekta  stayed  with  the  complainant  for
about 8 months and it is only thereafter the appellant No. 2 wanted to take back Ekta.
The  brother  of  complainant  PW.3  however,  pointedly  refused  though  after  some
persuasion  and  assurance  of  the  father-in-law,  in  the  presence  of  some  other
members of the family, of proper treatment to the daughter-in-law, the complainant
agreed  and  Ekta  thus  went  back  to  the  in-laws  place.  Further  evidence  however,
records  that  there  has  been  no  improvement  of  the  behavioral  pattern  and  she  was
subjected to dowry torture as also various abusive treatment by reason of not being
able to bear a child.  Incidentally, the two families, namely the bride's and groom's,
related to each other and it is on this score that learned Senior Advocate in support
of  the  appeal  contended  that  dowry  torture  or  even  user  of  any  abusive  language
were all figments of imagination :  The evidence however tell a different story -  The
torture  continued  and  reached  its  peak  in  July  1985  by  reason  of  a  booking  of  a

                                                                         

Maruti  Van  by  the  complainant  which  was  asked  to  be  delivered  to  the
accused/appellant, on refusal however, to comply with the demand for delivery of the
van by the complainant, the relationship was further estranged and PW 3 was given a
warning as regards the events to follow and it is only thereafter this incident of burn
injury  took  place.  A  number  of  relatives  were  also  examined  and  their  evidence
corroborate this state of affairs as narrated by the complainant PW.3.

9 . The  learned  Senior  Advocate  in  support  of  the  appeal  further  contended  that  the
factum of the hospitalization of Ekta in any event negates any ill treatment or torture,
but  to  be  treated  as  a  positive  evidence  of  goodwill  and  affection.  We  are  however
unable  to  record  our  concurrence  therewith  having  due  regard  to  the  evidence  and
other  materials  available  on  record.  There  is  thus  preponderance  of  evidence  of
dowry torture and it is on this count that Section 113A of the Evidence Act ought to
be taken note of Section 113A reads as below:-

"113(A).  Presumption  as  to  abetment  of  suicide  by  a  married
woman.-  When  the  question  is  whether  the  commission  of  suicide  by  a
woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and
it  is  shown  that  she  had  committed  suicide  within  a  period  of  seven  years
from  the  date  of  her  marriage  and  that  her  husband  or  such  relative  of  her
husband had subjected her to cruelty, the Court may presume, having regard
to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted
by her husband or by such relative of her husband.

Explanation;- For the purposes of this Section, "cruelty" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45-1860)."

10. Incorporation of Section 113A of the Evidence Act in the statute book, depicts a
legal presumption though however the time period of within seven years of marriage
is  the  pre-requisite  for  such  a  presumption.  The  circumstances  as  noticed
hereinbefore  in  the  contextual  facts  and  the  materials  on  record  substantiate  the
requirements  of  Section  113A  and  having  regard  to  the  language  used  in  Section
498A of the Indian Penal Code there cannot be any hesitation in coming to a finding
that  cruelty  is  written  large  as  regards  the  conduct  of  the  appellant  herein  towards
Ekta.  Needless  to  state  that  Section  113A  itself  by  way  of  an  explanation  provides
that 'cruelty' shall have the same meaning as is attributed under Section 498A of the
Indian Penal Code which reads as below:-

"(a)  any  willful  conduct  which  is  of  such  a  nature  as  is  likely  to  drive  the
woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or
health(whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

(b)  harassment  of  the  woman  where  such  harassment  is  with  a  view  to
coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for
any  property  or  valuable  security  or  is  on  account  of  failure  by  her  or  any
person related to her, to meet such demand."

11. On the wake of the aforesaid and by reason of the fact and the death of Ekta was
caused by burn injuries only and having considered the nature of injuries and since
one can not but rule out an accidental death as discussed herein before, the death of
Ekta  cannot  but  be  attributed  to  be  suicidal  on  the  basis  of  the  circumstances  as  is
available  on  record  with  the  situation  existing  and  having  regard  to  statutory
presumption, this Court can not but lend concurrence to the opinion expressed by the
High  Court.  The  decisions  of  this  Court  as  relied  upon  by  Mr.  Sushil  Kumar  (viz.:

                                                                             

Balwinder  Singh  v.  State  of  Punjab  MANU/SC/2012/1995  :  1996CriLJ883  :  Lakhjit
Singh  &  Anr.  V.  State  of  Punjab  MANU/SC/0905/1994:  State  of  Punjab  v.  Gurdip
Singh  &  Ors.  MANU/SC/1324/1996  :  (1996)7SCC163  Sharad  Birdhichand  Sarda  v.
State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0111/1984 : 1984CriLJ1738 do not however, advance
the matter any further since each case shall have to be dealt in the light of its own
factual  sphere  and  judicial  precedents  do  not  render  any  assistance  whatsoever  by
reason of the peculiar factual matrix. In the facts of the matter under consideration,
the circumstances pointedly point out the accused as a guilty person as abettors and
on  the  wake  of  the  aforesaid  the  order  of  conviction  cannot  be  interfered  with.  The
High  Court  has  been  lenient  enough  in  dealing  with  the  appellant  Nos.2  and  3  by
reducing the sentence, but since there is no cross appeal, we do not wish to record
any contra view as regards the sentence as well.

12. In that view of the matter, this appeal fails and thus stands dismissed.

                                                                           

