Kirpal Singh vs The State on 29 December, 1950

Punjab-Haryana High Court
Kirpal Singh vs The State on 29 December, 1950
 citations: 1951 CriLJ 1517
Author: Bhandari
Bench: Bhandari, Soni
JUDGMENT Bhandari, J.

1. Kirjal Singh has been found guilty of the murder of his brother Partap Singh and his brother's son
Waryam Singh and been sentenced to death. He has appealed and the sentence of death is also
before us for confirmation.

2 It appears that one Sawan Singh died some six years ago leaving behind him a large plot of land
and two sons, namely Partap Singh deceased and Kirpal Singh appellant. This land was split into
two by a railway track which ran through it from east to west The land which was towards the north
of the railway track was irrigated by a well as well as by a canal, whereas the land towards the south
appears to have been irrigated by means of the water of the well on the north which came to the land
on the south through a siphon which connected the lands on the north and the south underneath the
railway track. Another siphon which lies towards the west appears to have carried the canal water
from the south so the north. The evidence shows that shortly after the death of Sawan Singh his two
sons Partap Singh and Kamail Singh came to an arrangement by which half the land came into the
cultivating possession of one brother and the other half in the cultivating possession of the other.

3. At about 6 o'clock on the afternoon of the 7th June 1950 Kirpal Singh appellant and his son Kartar
Singh, who has since been acquitted, constructed a small channel on land which was in the
cultivating possession of Partap Singh with the object of taking canal water from the south to the
north through the siphon which is situated towards the east of the land. It is said that Partap Singh
and his son Waryam Singh both of whom were murdered in this case came and objected to the
construction of the channel. The appellant and his son persisted and it is said that the two dead men
started demolishing the channel. Hot words were exchanged between the parties and it is said that
the culprits who were armed with spears pounced upon the deceased. Kirpal Singh plunged his
weapon into the body of Partap Singh. Waryam Singh son of Partap Singh ran away across the
railway line but Kartar Singh pursued him and inflicted a spear blow on his person. Kartar Singh
sank to the ground and died almost immediately at the spot. His father Partap Singh, however,
lingered on for a while and died shortly afterwards.

4. The occurrence was witnessed by Mt. Sham Kaur, widow of Partap Singh, Joginder Singh, a son of
Partap Singh, one Harnam Singh who was not produced in Court and one Haria, partner in
cultivation of the deceased who was not cited as a witness and was not examined in Court. Word was
carried immediately to the village which is at a distance of about 350 'karams' from the scene of the
outrage. Narain Singh Lambardar arrived at the spot shortly afterwards and was informed by the
widow and the son of Partap Singh that the two dead men had been done to death by the appellant
and his son Kartar Singh. Narain Singh hastened to the Police Station which is at a distance of about
five miles from the scene of the outrage, and the first information report was recorded to his
dictation at about 8-15 p.m., the same day. Sub inspector Bans Rai arrived at the spot shortly

I

afterwards. After preparing the necessary statements he examined the scene of the occurrence. He
found that a 'Khal had been freshly dug on the south of the railway line about two 'karams' in length
and about two feet in width in the field of Partap Singh. The body of Partap Singh was lying at a
distance of a 'karam' or two from the 'khar within the railway boundary. The body of Waryam Singh
was lying towards the north of the railway line at a distance of about seven or eight 'karams' from
the body of his father Kartar Singh deceased. Kartar Singh was arrested on the day of the occurrence
when he went to report the matter to the Police. His father Kirpal Singh was arrested five days later,
that is on the 12th June 1950. Both the father and son were prosecuted under Section 302 of the
Indian Penal Code. The learned Sessions Judge convicted Kirpal "Singh of the offence of murder,
but he acquitted Kartar Singh on the ground that the latter was proved to be armed only with a 'kahi'
and none of the injuries on the persons of the deceased could be attributed to that weapon.

5. At the 'post-mortem examination the Medical Officer found two injuries on the body of Partap
Singh deceased, one being a perforating wound 1" x i" on the left side of the chest and the other a
similar wound on the left side of the abdomen. Death was due to the loss of blood on account of an
injury to the aorta caused by injury No. 1 mentioned above. The 'post-mortem' of the body of
Waryam Singh also revealed two injuries, one being a perforating wound 3/4" x 1/2" on the right
side of the chest and the other an incised wound 1 1/3" x 1/2" on the front and inner side of the arm
corresponding to injury No. 1 on the chest. It appears that the arm of this man went instinctively to
his chest when blow was aimed on that part of the body.

6. Nor did the accused escape unhurt. Kirpal Singh, appellant had an incised wound 2" x 1/2" skin
deep on the tail of the shoulder. His son Kartar Singh had two injuries, on being an incised
punctured wound on the front of the right arm and the other a contused wound on the front of the
right leg.

7. The appellant disclaimed responsibility for the crime. He declined to make a statement before the
Committing Magistrate, but when he was questioned by the learned Sessions Judge he gave his own
version of the incident. He stated that he had not dug any new 'khar, that it was his turn to take
water from the canal that day, that his son Kartar Singh and his 'sanjhi' Haria both went ahead on
the day of the occurrence to clear the 'khal' for the purpose of getting water through it, that that
'khal' was in the land which was in the cultivating possession of Partap Singh, that it was an old
'khal' and had been used by the parties for eleven years preceding the date of murder, that when
Kartar Singh and Haria were in the land Partap Singh deceased abused them, that Partap Singh did
not like the appellant or his son to cultivate the land, that Partap Singh had sold his land towards
the north of the railway track and was anxious that the appellant and his son should not irrigate
their own land in the north, that Partap Singh delivered a blow with his sheathed kirpan on the
person of his son Kartar Singh, that the appellant was working in the adjacent field when he heard
the alarm and went to the spot armed with a spear, that Partap Singh shouted to his son Waryam
Singh and asked him not to let Kartar Singh escape, that as both Partap Singh and Waryam Singh
were armed with spears and as both of them were trying to encircle Kartar Singh with a view to kill
him the appellant plunged his spear into the body of Partap Singh, that Waryam Singh also
delivered a blow with his spear on the person Kartar Singh, that when Kirpal Singh inflicted the
injury on the person of Partap Singh and attempted to return to his 'pir' Waryam Singh deceased


delivered a spear blow on the person of Kirpal Singh which hit him on the shoulder, that his son
Kartar Singh finding an opportunity escaped with his life, that Waryam Singh deceased again tried
to attack the appellant because Partap Singh deceased had already fallen on the other side of the
railway track and that on seeing that Waryam Singh had delivered a 'barchha' blow and intended to
harm the appellant, the appellant inflicted injuries on the person of Waryam Singh. The appellant
stated that his son Kartar Singh was armed only with a 'kaiii' but that he did not cause any injuries
to any person even with that weapon. Kartar Singh's statement is similar to that of his father Kirpal
Singh but there is one important discrepancy in the statements of these two accused persons,
namely that whereas Kirpal Singh states that Waryam Singh inflicted injuries on the person of
Kartar Singh, Kartar Singh himself states that both the injuries on his person were caused by Partap
Singh deceased. No evidence was produced in defence.

8. The principal point for decision in the present case is whether the appellant and his son had
constructed a new channel on the land belonging to Partap Singh deceased as alleged by the
prosecution or whether they were endeavouring merely to clean an existing watercourse with the
object of irrigating their fields as alleged by the accused. In the first information report which was
recorded to the dictation of Narain Singh at 8-15 p.m., on the day of the occurrence, it was stated
clearly that Partap Singh deceased had demolished the 'khal' of water by which the fields of both
Kirpal Singh and Partap Singh used to be irrigated. In his statement before the trial Court Narain
Singh deposed that Kirpal Singh had on the day of the occurrence constructed a 'khal' and that this
khal' had been demolished by Partap Singh as a result of which the appellant and his son attacked
Partap Singh and his son Waryam Singh. Mt. Sham Kaur, widow of Partap Singh, stated
categorically that the channel over which the dispute arose had been newly dug up by the appellant
and his son. Joginder Singh, son of Partap Singh, makes a similar deposition. After going carefully
through the records of the case it seems to me that although there was probably an existing channel
by means of which the fields of the parties were irrigated that channel was used only for bringing
water from the well situate in the north of the railway track. It is in evidence that Kirpal Singh was
anxious to irrigate his fields by means of water from the canal which was situated towards the west
of the fields of the parties. With this end in view he was anxious to dig up a new channel, or at any
rate to widen the channel which had already been constructed. I am therefore of the opinion that
Kirpal Singh either dug up an entirely new channel or merely widened an existing channel with the
object of enlarging it and making it fit for receiving the water from the canal. This conclusion
appears to me to be fully supported by the testimony of the Sub-Inspector of Police who, as I have
said already, arrived at the spot on the day of the occurrence and found that a 'khal' had been freshly
dug on the south of the railway line about two 'karams' in length and about two feet in width. If
Kirpal Singh and his son Kartar Singh did in fact dig a new channel on land which was in the
cultivating possession of Partap Singh or if they widened the existing channel and made it broader
which is equivalent to having constructed a new channel they were in my opinion clearly in the
wrong, for it was not open to them even though they were co-owners in the plot of land in question
to disturb the possession of Partap Singh. It is true that Kirpal Singh and Kartar Singh had a right to
irrigate their fields by means of the channels which were already in existence, but they had no right
whatsoever to enter upon the land belonging to Partap Singh and constructing new channels or
widening the existing ones.


9. The Patwari who was examined in this case has stated that there are two fields bearing 'khasra'
No. 266 min, one on the east being in the possession of the deceased and that on the west being in
the possession of the accused. They are repa-rated by a channel which has been indicated in the plan
as running from north to south. The Patwari stated that the 'khal' which was being dug was in the
field of Partap Singh deceased and is shown red in the plan. The only inference which may
reasonably be drawn from this statement is that the occurrence took place as the appellant and his
son constructed a new 'khal' running from north to south in the land which was in the cultivating
possession of Partap Singh deceased. This statement is clearly at variance with the testimony of the
several persons who were present at the spot at the time of the alleged occurrence, for all of them are
unanimous in stating that the occurrence took place because the appellant and his son had
constructed a new channel from 'west to east' with the object of transporting canal water from the
southern to the northern field through the eastern siphon under the railway line, x have no
hesitation in holding that the Patwari made his statement under a misapprehension and that the
dispute really arose as a new channel was constructed from west to east.

10. There is not much dispute in regard to the occurrence itself. It is in evidence that on the 7th June
Kirpal Singh and Kartar Singh" were making a new 'khal' in the portion of the land which is in the
cultivating possession of Partap Singh when Partap Singh appeared on the scene and objected to the
new construction. Hot words were exchanged between Kirpal Singh and Kartar Singh on the one
hand and Partap Singh and Waryam Singh on the other. Kirpal Singh and his son challenged the
deceased and Kirpal Singh. actually delivered a spear blow on the person of Partap Singh. Waryam
Singh son of Partap Singh, took to his heals, but Kartar Singh accused ran after him and delivered a
spear blow on his person. This evidence is supported by the testimony of Mt. Sham Kaur wife of
Partap Singh and Joginder Singh son of Partap Singh. Mr. Sethi who appears for the appellant
contends that both these witnesses are closely related to the deceased and are naturally interested in
putting forward a version which is most favourable to the prosecution, that Mt. Sham Kaur was
probably not present afc the spot as her name was not mentioned in the first information report,
that her statement before the police contradicts her statement before the trial Court, that the
statement of Joginder Singh cannot be accepted at its face value as he is a boy of about 14 or 15 years
of age and could be induced to say almost anything against the accused, that he stated before the
trial Court that both Kirpal Singh and Kartar Singh were armed with spears, that the trial Court
came to the conclusion that Kirpal Singh was armed with a spear and that Kartar Singh was armed
with a 'kahi' that this witness stated on oath that the accused had; constructed 'khals' on the land of
Partap Singh, on previous occasions and that that statement has not been corroborated by his
mother Mt, Sham Kaur. I regret I am unable to concur in the contention that the statements of these
two witnesses, the mother and the son, are not worthy of credence. It is true that both of them are
closely related to the deceased but that fact alone would not render the evidence given by them open
to doubt and suspicion. It is true also that the name of Mt. Sham Kaur was not mentioned in the first
information report as an eye-witness, but the concluding portion of the report shows that as soon as
Narain Singh appeared on the scene of the occurrence he was told by Mt. Sham Kaur and Joginder
Singh that Kirpal Singh and Kartar Singh were the perpetrators of the crime. It is obvious therefore
that both Mt. Sham Kaur and Joginder Singh were present at the spot when Narain Singh arrived on
hearing of the occurrence. The discrepancies which occur in her statements before the Police and
before the trial Court are Of a minor nature. Nor can I see any reason for disregarding the testimony


of Joginder Singh son of the deceased. He is a boy of about 14 or 15 years of age. His name was
clearly mentioned in the first information report. He has given a very clear and straightforward
account of the occurrence and although he was subjected to a very searching cross-examination the
learned counsel for the accused was unable to shake the evidence given by him. I can see no reason
whatsoever for holding ? either that Mt. Sham Kaur and Joginder Singh were not present at the spot
at the time of the alleged occurrence or that they are not telling the truth.

11. The evidence on record satisfies me that Kirpal Singh and Kartar Singh accused went to the land
of Partap Singh on the day of the occurrence, that they started constructing either a new channel or
widening an existing one, that Partap Singh and Waryam Singh appeared on the scene and
prevented them from interfering with his possession, that hot words were exchanged between the
parties and that as a result of the abuses which were exchanged Kirpal Singh who was armed with a
spear and Kartar Singh who also is alleged to have been armed with a similar weapon pounced upon
the deceased and killed them instantly at the spot, indeed the evidence shows that as soon as the
fight started Waryam Singh took to his heels but was pursued by Kartar Singh and was killed by him
at a considerable distance from where his father Partap Singh was attacked and killed. If that story
of the attack on Waryam Singh is true, it seems to me that the Court below was not justified in
acquitting Kartar Singh. No appeal has been preferred by the State in regard to the acquittal of
Kartar Singh and I need only say that Kartar Singh has been very fortunate in securing the verdict of
acquittal.

12. The only question which needs to be considered at this stage is whether the appellant was rightly
convicted of an offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code or whether the facts of this case
do not indicate that he should have been given the benefit either of Exception 2 or of Exception 4 to
Section 300 of the said Code.

13. The plea that the appellant inflicted injuries on the person of Partap Singh deceased in order to
defend his son Kartar Singh cannot bear a minute's scrutiny. Not a single witness has come forward
to state that either Partap Singh or his son Waryam Singh initiated the attack on Kar tar Singh and
not an iota of evidence has been produced in support of the plea of self-defence other than the
unsworn testimony of the appellant and his son. On the other hand, the persons who were present at
the spot at the time of the alleged occurrence have stated on oath that when Partap Singh
demolished the new 'khal' which had been constructed on his land both the appellant and his son
pounced upon him; that Partap Singh delivered a 'kahi' blow on the person of Kartar Singh with the
object of warding off the spear blow which was aimed at him; and that Waryam Singh deceased who
had taken to his heels on account of fear was pursued a considerable distance by Kartar Singh
accused and killed with a spear. The allegation that Waryam Singh was pursued and killed is
supported by the fact that the body of Waryam Singh was found at a distance of 7 or 8 'karams' from
the body of his father Partap Singh. It is an accepted proposition of law that a person cannot avail
himself of the plea of self-defence in a case of homicide when he was himself the aggressor and
wilfully brought on himself, without legal excuse the necessity for the killing. It would be strange
indeed if a person who provokes an attack, brings on a combat and then slays his assailant were to
take shelter behind the plea of self-defence in justification of the blow which he struck during the
encounter.



14. Nor can the appellant claim the benefit of Exception 4 to Section 300 of the Penal Code. The help
of this Exception can be invoked if and only if death is caused (a) without pre-meditation, (b) in a
sudden fight, (c) without the offender's having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner. To bring a case within this Exception all the ingredients mentioned in it must be found.
According to the English law if the homicide was committed in a sudden heat of passion on account
of provocation and not of express malice, it amounts only to manslaughter; but if the killing was the
result of malice and of deliberate and pre-meditated intent it is murder. Thus even to the case of a
sudden quarrel where the parties immediately fight, the case may be attended with such
circumstances as will indicate malice on the part of the party killing, and then the killing would be
murder and not merely manslaughter. If, for example, the parties at the commencement attack each
other upon equal terms, and afterwards, in the course of the fight, one of them in his passion
snatches up a deadly weapon and kills the other with it, this would be manslaughter only. 'The King
v. William Snow' (1730-1815), 1 Leach 151. But if the use of a deadly weapon was intended from the
first, the killing is murder: 'R. v. Kessal, 1824 1 C & P 437. The position is more or less the same
under the law as it obtains in this country. Exception 4 comes into play only if death is caused
Without pre-meditation. To constitute a premeditated killing it is necessary that the accused should
have reflected with a view to determine whether he would kill or not; and that he should have
determined to kill as the result of that reflection; that is to say, the killing should be a
pre-determinded killing upon consideration and not a sudden killing under the momentary
excitement and impulse of passion upon provocation given at the time or so recently before as not to
allow time for reflection. Premeditation may be established by direct or positive evidence or by
circumstantial evidence. Evidence of premeditation can be furnished by former grudges or previous
threats and expressions of ill-feelings; by acts of preparation to kill, such as procuring a deadly
weapon or selecting a dangerous weapon in preference to one loss dangerous, and by the manner in
which the killing was committed. For example, repeated shots, blows or other acts of violence are
sufficient evidence of premeditation. Premeditation is not proved from the mere fact of a killing by
the use of a deadly weapon but must be shown by the manner of the killing and the circumstances,
under which it was done or from other facts in evidence. (15) The question which arises in this case
is whether the appellant killed the deceased in the heat of passion aroused by the demolition of the
'kanal' or whether there was a design to kill before the 'khal' was demolished. I am of the opinion
that the appellant had formed a deliberate design to kill Partap Singh and Waryam Singh and that
the death was in consequence of previous malice and not of the sudden provocation, it is true that
the appellant is a brother of Partap Singh and an uncle of Waryam Singh, but it is in evidence that
immediately after the death of their father disputes arose between Kirpal Singh and Partap Singh in
regard to the partition of land as they would not agree to its proper distribution. The appellant was
aware that he was constructing a new channel in the land which was in the cultivating possession of
his brother Partap Singh deceased, and he knew or should have known that the deceased would
object to this new construction. Notwithstanding this knowledge he armed himself with a 'kirpan'
and took his son to the scene of the occurrence and started digging up a new channel with the object
of taking canal water from the fields in the south to the fields in the north. Partap Singh came to the
spot and, as was to be expected, he objected to the new construction and proceeded to demolish it.
The appellant knew that the' would happen and he was prepared for it. He pounced upon Partap
Singh. Waryam Singh son of Partap Singh took to his heels but Kartar Singh who was armed with a
spear ran after him and overtaking him at some distance plunged this deadly weapon into the body



of the victim. In the circumstances it seems to me that neither the appellant nor his son was
prompted to kill the deceased as a result of passion suddenly aroused. On the other hand I am
inclined to think that the occasion was not sudden but as pointed out toy an eminent Judge in
another case, was urged only as a cloak for pre-existing malice. The provocation was not of a
character as would be naturally calculated to excite or arouse the passion and, in any case, it was not
sufficient to reduce the offence of murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

16. For these reasons, I would uphold the order of the learned Sessions Judge and dismiss the
appeal preferred by the appellant. The sentence of death is confirmed.

17. Soni, J: I. agree. ,


7

