

 Richhpal Singh Meena

Vs.

 Ghasi



JUDGMENT

1 . The  question  agitating  us  relates  to  the  circumstances  (if  any)  under  which  a
conviction for murder Under Section 300/302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Indian
Penal  Code) could be altered into a conviction  Under  Section 322/325 of the  Indian
Penal  Code  (voluntarily  causing  grievous  hurt)  or  Under  Section  326  of  the  Indian
Penal  Code  (voluntarily  causing  grievous  hurt  by  dangerous  weapons  or  means),
ignoring or overlooking the intermediate possibility of a conviction Under Section 304
of the Indian Penal Code.

2. The question has arisen since in this appeal, despite a death having resulted in an
incident involving the Respondents, their conviction for murder by the High Court has
been  altered  to  a  conviction  for  voluntarily  causing  grievous  hurt,  ignoring  or
overlooking a homicide.

The facts

3. On 14th  December, 1996 the  Appellant (Richhpal  Singh  Meena) and a few others
were  sitting  beside  a  well  near  the  agricultural  fields.  Richhpal's  father  Sunderlal
Meena (deceased) had gone to inspect the fields. While he was there, Sunderlal met
Kailash,  Ghasi,  Lala  and  their  respective  wives  and  their  mother.  Soon  thereafter,
there  was  a  hot  exchange  of  words  between  them  regarding  damage  to  the
embankment in the agricultural fields.

4. Kailash, Ghasi and Lala told Sunderlal that they were looking for him and he had
now walked into the trap.  Saying this,  Kailash caught hold of  Sunderlal while  Ghasi
gave him a blow with a shovel and Lala gave him a blow with a lathi on his back. On
receiving the blows  Sunderlal fell down and on hearing noises,  Richhpal and others
ran  towards  the  spot  and  found  that  Sunderlal  was  being  beaten  up  by  the  ladies.

                                                                         

With the assistance of those who were with him, Richhpal managed to take Sunderlal
to a hospital in Alwar but he succumbed to the injuries.

5 . A  post-mortem  examination  was  carried  out  by  Dr.  Amar  Singh  Rathore  and  he
gave a report that the two injuries given to Sunderlal were sufficient to cause death
in the normal course. The injuries were:

External injuries-

1. Contusion abrasion measuring 8 x 10 cm reddish, located on left
side of the rear side of the back.

2 . Contusion  abrasion  measuring  8  x  8  cm  located  on  right  side  of
chest.

Internal injuries-

Fracture  on  the  4th and 5th  ribs  located  on  right  side  of  the  chest.
Right lung crushed measuring 4 x 3 x 1 cm.  Blood clotting in lung.
Fracture  in  7th  and  8th  rib  on  left  side.  Lung  crushed.  Plurae  and
sic(?) of either side of the lungs torn.

Dr. Rathore deposed that shock, haemorrhage and lung injuries resulted in his death.
The injuries were sufficient to cause death in the normal course.

6 . On  these  broad  facts,  a  charge  sheet  was  filed  against  Ghasi  and  Lala  for  an
offence punishable Under Sections 302, 302/34 and 447 of the Indian Penal Code.

7. On the evidence adduced before him, the Additional District and Sessions Judge-
III,  Alwar  convicted  Ghasi  and  Lala  for  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  302  of
the Indian Penal Code as well as for an offence punishable Under Section 447 of the
Indian Penal Code. However, they were acquitted of the charge framed Under Section
302/34 of the Indian Penal Code.

8 . Feeling  aggrieved,  the  convicts  preferred  D.B.  Criminal  Appeal  No.  403/1997  in
the  Jaipur  Bench  of  the  Rajasthan  High  Court.  By  a  judgment  and  order  dated  16th
April,  2003  the  High  Court  concluded  that  Ghasi  and  Lala  could  be  convicted  only
Under Section 325/34 of the Indian Penal Code and not Under Section 302/34 of the
Indian Penal Code. The High Court also held that they could not be convicted Under
Section 447 read with Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. The sentence awarded to
them  was  imprisonment  for  the  period  undergone;  that  is,  about  18  months
imprisonment.

9. It will be noticed that Ghasi and Lala were not convicted by the Trial Judge Under
Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code but were convicted only Under Section 302
and Section 447 of the Indian Penal Code. Clearly, therefore, the High Court did not
correctly  record  the  final  conclusion  of  the  Trial  Judge.  However,  this  is  a  minor
matter.

Our initial doubts

10. While hearing this appeal filed by the victim's son, we were a little surprised that
the fact of  Sunderlal's homicide was not taken into consideration by the  High  Court
while convicting Ghasi and Lala and also that no attempt was made to ascertain from

                                                                  

the  evidence  on  record  (if  at  all  it  was  possible)  to  fix  responsibility  for  his  death
either on Ghasi or on Lala or both. While we were ably assisted in the hearing by Ms.
Sumita  Hazarika, learned amicus curiae, we nevertheless felt that the issue required
some  greater  experience.  Accordingly  Mr.  Uday  U.  Lalit,  Senior  Advocate  was
requested to assist us in the matter, and he willingly agreed.

11. Mr.  Lalit  cited  several  decisions  of  this  Court  involving  the  death  of  a  human
being but in which the only punishment awarded to the accused was for voluntarily
causing  grievous  hurt  and  not  any  punishment  for  homicide.  Learned  amicus
expressed the view that the fact that a human being had died could not and should
not  have  been  ignored  or  overlooked  in  any  of  the  cited  decisions.  Learned  amicus
was also of opinion that all these decisions were rendered by two Judge Benches of
this  Court  and  they  needed  reconsideration  since  they  did  not  lay  down  the  correct
law.

12. We propose to deal with all the judgments cited by learned amicus as well as by
learned  Counsel  appearing  for  the  convicts  and  then  determine  whether  they  need
reconsideration.

Homicide and the Indian Penal Code

13. The Indian Penal Code recognizes two kinds of homicide: (1) Culpable homicide,
dealt  with  between  Sections  299  and  304  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,1  and  (2)  Not-
culpable  homicide,  dealt  with  by  Section  304-A  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.2  For  the
present  discussion  we  are  not  concerned  with  Section  304-B  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code.

14. There  are  two  kinds  of  culpable  homicide:  (i)  Culpable  homicide  amounting  to
murder (Section 300/302 of the  Indian  Penal  Code),  and  (ii)  Culpable  homicide  not
amounting to murder (Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code). A rash or negligent act
that results in the death of a person may not amount to culpable homicide in view of
Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code. In other words, such a rash or negligent act
would  be  'not-culpable  homicide'.  But,  there  could  be  a  rash  or  negligent  act  that
results in the death of a person and yet amount to a culpable homicide falling within
the  scope  and  ambit  of  Section  299  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  This  distinction  was
clearly brought out (following Naresh Giri v. State of M.P. MANU/SC/4297/2007 :
(2008)1  SCC  791  which  contains  a  very  useful  discussion)  in State  of  Punjab  v.
Balwinder Singh MANU/SC/0005/2012 : (2012) 2 SCC 182 in the following words:

Section  304-A  was  inserted  in  the  Penal  Code  by  Penal  Code  (Amendment)
Act  27  of  1870  to  cover  those  cases  wherein  a  person  causes  the  death  of
another  by  such  acts  as  are  rash  or  negligent  but  there  is  no  intention  to
cause death and no knowledge that the act will cause death. The case should
not  be  covered  by  Sections  299  and  300  only  then  it  will  come  under  this
section.  The  section  provides  punishment  of  either  description  for  a  term
which may extend to two years or fine or both in case of homicide by rash or
negligent act. To bring a case of homicide Under Section 304-A Indian Penal
Code, the following conditions must exist, namely,

(1) there must be death of the person in question;

(2) the accused must have caused such death; and

(3) that such act of the accused was rash or negligent and that it did


not amount to culpable homicide.

The  distinction  brought  out  in  both  the  judgments  has  been  accepted  and  followed,
in Alister  Anthony  Pereira  v.  State  of  Maharashtra
amongst  others, 
MANU/SC/0015/2012  :  (2012)  2  SCC  648  and State  v.  Sanjeev  Nanda
MANU/SC/0621/2012 : (2012) 8 SCC 450. In these two cases, this Court found that a
case  of  culpable  homicide  not  amounting  to  murder  (within  Section  299  read  with
Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code) was made out and a conviction handed down
accordingly.

15. Therefore, it is quite clear that when there is a death of a human being, it may
either  be  culpable  homicide  (amounting  to  murder  or  not  amounting  to  murder)  or
not-culpable  homicide,  but  it  is  a  homicide  nevertheless.  Keeping  this  distinction  in
mind, the decisions cited by learned amicus may be considered.

Relevant decisions

1 6 . This  category  consists  of  five  cases  in  which  despite  a  homicide,  this  Court
convicted the accused only for voluntarily causing grievous hurt, apparently ignoring
or  overlooking  the  provisions  of  Section  299  and  Section  304  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code.

17. In State of Punjab v. Surjan Singh MANU/SC/0221/1975 : (1976)1 SCC 588
the  Trial  Court  convicted  Surjan  Singh  and  Charan  Singh  for  the  murder  of  Labh
Singh and thereby having committed an offence punishable Under Section 302/34 of
the Indian Penal Code. On appeal, the High Court altered the conviction to an offence
punishable Under Section 326/34 of the Indian Penal Code3 even though one of the
injuries  was  sufficient  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  to  cause  death.  This  was  on
the ground that they had, on the spur of the moment, formed a common intention to
cause only grievous injury to Labh Singh. In other words, it was held that a common
intention to cause the death of Labh Singh was lacking.

1 8 . In  an  appeal  filed  by  the  State,  this  Court  held  that  the  High  Court  did  not
commit  any  error  of  law  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  it  did,  namely,  that  a
common intention of causing the death of Labh Singh was absent. The applicability of
Section  304  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  was  not  adverted  to  by  this  Court  despite  a
homicide.  The  quantum  of  sentence  awarded  is  unfortunately  not  mentioned  in  the
Report.

19. Sardul  Singh v.  State of  Haryana  MANU/SC/0843/2002 : (2002) 8  SCC 372
was a case in which the Trial Court convicted Sardul Singh for the murder of Naresh
Kumar while Jagtar Singh was acquitted. The High Court confirmed the conviction of
Sardul  Singh and also set aside the acquittal of  Jagtar  Singh.  Both were held liable
for an offence punishable Under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.

20. In  appeal,  this  Court  held  that  the  assailants  had  a  common  intention  to  inflict
injuries on the deceased and not cause his death, that being the unintended ultimate
result. Based on this conclusion, it was held that Sardul Singh and Jagtar Singh could
be convicted only for an offence punishable Under Section 325/34 of the Indian Penal
Code4  and  must  be  acquitted  of  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  302  of  the
Indian Penal Code. The sentence awarded was of two years imprisonment. Again, the
applicability of Section 299 read with Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code was not
considered despite a homicide.

                                                                            

2 1 . Rattan  Singh  v.  State  of  Punjab  (1988)  Supp.  SCC  456  is  a  Record  of
Proceedings,  two  steps  lower  in  the  ladder  than  a  judgment  and  one  step  below  an
order, and yet it has been found worthy of being reported.  In this case,  Gaje  Singh
was  attacked  by  number  of  persons  and  he  ultimately  succumbed  to  the  injuries
received. of the assailants, some were convicted for an offence punishable, inter alia,
Under  Section  302/149  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  In  appeal,  the  High  Court  upheld
the  conviction  of  three  assailants,  that  is,  Ram  Singh,  Dan  Singh  and  Rattan  Singh
and  acquitted  the  others.  These  three  assailants  were  not  only  convicted  for  an
offence punishable  Under  Section 302/149 of the  Indian  Penal  Code but also for an
offence  punishable  Under  Section  325/149  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and  Under
Section 324 of the Indian Penal Code.

22. This  Court  held  that  Ram  Singh,  Dan  Singh  and  Rattan  Singh  had  only  caused
grievous  injuries  to  Gaje  Singh  and  therefore  their  conviction  Under  Section  302  of
the Indian Penal Code could not be sustained. Therefore, they were convicted for an
offence punishable Under Sections 325 and 326 of the Indian Penal Code, as the case
may be, and sentenced to five years imprisonment. Again, this Court did not examine
the  applicability  of  Section  299  read  with  Section  304  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code
despite a homicide.

2 3 . I n Ninaji  Raoji  Boudha  v.  State  of  Maharashtra  MANU/SC/0152/1976  :
(1976) 2  SCC 117 two persons (Ninaji and  Raoji) were convicted by the  Trial  Court
for an offence punishable Under Sections 325 and 147 of the Indian Penal Code and
sentenced  to  five  years  imprisonment.  This  was  despite  the  fact  that  the  injuries
caused by them on Bhonaji had resulted in his death. In an appeal filed by the State,
the  High  Court convicted them for offences punishable  Under  Section 302/34 of the
Indian Penal Code for causing the death of Bhonaji.

2 4 . Ninaji  and  Raoji  appealed  to  this  Court  and  it  was  held  that  they  had  given
several  blows  to  Bhonaji  and  one  of  them  was  "a  forceful  blow  on  the  head  which
caused a depressed fracture and fissures all over" resulting in his death.  This  Court
noted  that  from  the  evidence  on  record:  (a)  it  could  not  be  established  who  had
given  that  forceful  blow;  (b)  the  evidence  established  that  Ninaji  and  Raoji  did  not
have  a  common  intention  of  causing  the  death  of  Bhonaji  but  there  was  a  common
intention  of  causing  him  grievous  injury.  Consequently,  due  to  the  lack  of  any
conclusive  or  specific  evidence  of  who  was  responsible  for  the  homicide  and  the
absence  of  a  common  intention,  Ninaji  and  Raoji  were  acquitted  of  the  offence  of
murder  but  were  convicted  of  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  325/34  of  the
Indian Penal Code and sentenced to five years imprisonment. It appears to us that the
principle applied by this Court, though not so stated, is to be found in Section 72 of
the Indian Penal Code which reads as follows:

72.  Punishment  of  person  guilty  of  one  of  several  offences,  the
judgment  stating  that  it  is  doubtful  of  which.--  In  all  cases  in  which
judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several offences specified
in  the  judgment,  but  that  it  is  doubtful  of  which  of  these  offences  he  is
guilty,  the  offender  shall  be  punished  for  the  offence  for  which  the  lowest
punishment is provided if the same punishment is not provided for all.

25. Similarly, the principle laid down in Section 72 of the Indian Penal Code appears
to  have  been  invoked  in Ram  Lal  v.  Delhi  Administration  in  which  four  persons
(including  Ram  Lal)  were  accused  of  having  murdered  Har  Lal.  The  Trial  Court
acquitted  one  of  them  but  convicted  the  others,  including  Ram  Lal  for  an  offence

                                                                          

punishable Under Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code. In appeal, the High Court
upheld the conviction of Ram Lal for an offence punishable, Under Section 302 of the
Indian  Penal  Code, while the other two were convicted  Under  Section 325/34 of the
Indian Penal Code.

26. In appeal before this Court, the question was whether Ram Lal could have been
convicted  for  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  302  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  It
was  held  (by  a  three-Judge  Bench)  that  the  High  Court  had  erroneously  concluded
that the deceased received only one injury on the head. In fact, he had suffered two
injuries  on  the  head.  Additionally,  it  was  found  that  the  High  Court  also  held  that
Ram Lal had given only one blow with a stick to Har Lal on the head. On these facts,
it could not be said with any degree of certainty whether the blow delivered by Ram
Lal proved fatal or the blow given by him did not prove fatal. In the absence of any
clear  identification  of  the  blow  given  by  Ram  Lal,  he  was  entitled  to  a  benefit  of
doubt.  However,  since  the  common  intention  of  the  three  assailants  was  to  cause  a
grievous injury to Har Lal, therefore Ram Lal was liable for conviction Under Section
325/34  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  apparently  applying  the  principle  laid  down  in
Section  72  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  Accordingly,  he  was  sentenced  to  five  years
imprisonment.

27. It  will  be  seen  that  these  decisions  were  decided  on  their  own  particular  facts.
This Court did not lay down any law that if there is only a common intention to cause
a  grievous  injury  without  any  intention  to  kill,  an  accused  cannot  be  convicted  of
murder.  This  is  quite  obvious  since  it  would  result  in  an  absurd  situation  in  cases
where a person smashes the head of another and pleads that he had no intention to
kill the victim but only cause a grievous injury. The accused must be deemed to know
the consequences of his act, unless it was accidental or unintentional.

Partially relevant decisions

28. The  second  category  of  decisions  cited  by  learned  amicus,  though  relevant,  do
not  greatly  advance  our  discourse  any  further  since,  in  these  cases  a  homicide  had
taken place and at least one of the accused was convicted for that homicide.

29. In Radhey  Shyam v.  State of  U.P.  MANU/SC/0660/1998 : (1999) 1  SCC 168
three  persons  were  convicted  by  the  Trial  Court  for  the  murder  of  Ram  Saran.  On
appeal,  the  High  Court  set  aside  their  conviction  for  an  offence  punishable  Under
Section  302  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  but  convicted  them  for  an  offence  punishable
under  Part  I  of  Section  304  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and  sentenced  them  to
imprisonment for seven years.

30. of the three persons so convicted only Radhey Shyam approached this Court and
his  contention  was  that  he  had  not  inflicted  any  blow  on  the  deceased.  On  a
consideration  of  the  evidence,  this  Court  concluded  that  there  was  nothing  to  show
that  Radhey  Shyam  had  given  the  fatal  blow,  or  for  that  matter  any  blow,  that  was
likely  to  cause  the  death  of  Ram  Saran.  Accordingly,  his  conviction  under  Part  I  of
Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code was altered to a conviction Under Section 325
of the Indian Penal Code and the sentence reduced to two years imprisonment.

31. This  decision  is  not  so  relevant  since  two  of  the  assailants  were  convicted  for
causing  the  death  of  a  human  being  and  were  not  let  off  only  for  an  offence
punishable for having caused grievous injuries.

32. Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab : (1982) 3 SCC 221 is

                                                                           

a short order and by no stretch of imagination can it be considered to be a judgment
and certainly not a reportable judgment-it is merely the disposal of a case. The order
does not indicate the facts of the case and there is no discussion of the law. In any
event, a reading of the order indicates that since there was no pre-concert between
Jarnail  Singh  and  Sarwan  Singh  to  cause  the  death  of  the  victim,  their  conviction
Under  Section  302/34  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  could  not  be  upheld  by  this  Court.
The  order  does  not  indicate  the  nature  of  the  injuries  on  the  deceased  or  who
inflicted them. All that can be deciphered from the order is that Jarnail Singh gave a
simple  injury  to  the  deceased.  Since  that  is  so,  he  obviously  could  not  have  been
punished for the offence of murder. However, it is not clear what injuries were given
to the deceased by Sarwan Singh and whether he was convicted for the homicide or
not.

33. We shall have occasion a little later to deal with the reporting of orders passed
by this Court and the reporting of a Record of Proceedings.

34. In Sk. Karimullah v. State of A.P.  : (2009) 11 SCC 371
accused No. 1 (not identified in the judgment) and Karimullah were convicted by the
Trial Court for an offence punishable Under Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Their conviction was upheld by the High Court.

35. Only Karimullah approached this Court and it was found, on facts, that no charge
was  framed  against  him  Under  Section  34  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  Additionally,
there  was  a  discrepancy  in  the  eye  witness  account  with  regard  to  his  role  in  the
attack on the deceased. One witness stated that he had assaulted the deceased with a
stick while another stated that he had given him a fist blow. Under the circumstances,
on the basis of the evidence on record, this Court held that Karimullah was liable to
be  punished  for  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  325  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code
and not Under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. In this case also, at least one of
the assailants was convicted for a homicide.

Earlier decisions of this Court

36. Learned  amicus  submitted  that  the  cases  falling  in  the  first  category  above,  in
which there is a homicide but a conviction only for voluntarily causing grievous hurt,
may  even  fall  within  Section  300  (thirdly)  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and,  therefore,
require  reconsideration.  To  illustrate  his  point,  learned  amicus  referred  to  three
being Abdul  Waheed  Khan  v.  State  of  A.P.
decisions, : (2002) 7  SCC 175 which decision in turn refers to Rajwant
Singh  v.  State  of  Kerala  1966  Supp  SCR  230  and Virsa  Singh  v.  State  of
Punjab  : AIR 1958 SC 465.

first 

the 

37. It  must  be  made  clear  that  learned  amicus  did  not  cite  these  decisions  with  a
view  to  establish  that  the  first  category  of  decisions  mentioned  above  were  either
incorrectly  decided  or  that  Section  300  (thirdly)  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  was
attracted. That was mentioned by him only by the way. The principal reason for citing
these decisions was to highlight the view taken by this  Court that where violence is
deliberately inflicted and it results in the death of a human being, culpable homicide
is  made  out-the  only  question  being  whether  it  is  murder  or  culpable  homicide  not
amounting to murder.

38. In Rajwant Singh this Court held (and it is futile to try and paraphrase the view
lucidly expressed):

                                                                         

In  addition  to  the  other  evidence  establishing  the  connection  of  Unni  and
Rajwant Singh with this crime there is a confession by Rajwant Singh before
the Sub-Magistrate, Cochin in which he graphically describes the part played
by  him  and  Unni.  Rajwant  Singh  also  stated  that  they  only  wanted  the  Lt.
Commander and the sentry to remain unconscious while they rifled the safe
and  took  away  the  money.  It  is  contended  that  we  must  accept  the
confession as a whole and must hold on its basis that the intention was not
to kill, and that the offence of murder is therefore not established. As this is
the most important point in the case we shall consider it first.

This point was argued by Mr. J.G. Sethi on behalf of Rajwant Singh and his
arguments were adopted by  Mr.  Harbans  Singh on behalf of  Unni.  Mr.  Sethi
argued that the offence was one of causing grievous hurt or at the worst of
culpable  homicide  not  amounting  to  murder  and  punishable  Under  Section
304 (second part) of the Indian Penal Code. It is quite plain that the acts
of the Appellants resulted in the death of the victim and the offence
cannot  be  placed 
lower  than  culpable  homicide  because  the
Appellants  must  have  known  that  what  they  were  doing  was  likely
to kill. The short question, therefore, is whether the offence was murder or
culpable homicide.

(Emphasis given by us)

On facts, it was held that a case of murder falling within Section 300 (thirdly) of the
Indian Penal Code was made out.

39. Rajwant Singh followed Virsa Singh (a three-Judge Bench) which conclusively
lays down the requirements of Section 300 (thirdly) of the Indian Penal Code in the
following  manner  (again  it  is  difficult  to  paraphrase  the  clearly  articulated
conclusions):

To put it shortly, the prosecution must prove the following facts before it can
bring a case Under Section 300 "thirdly";

First, it must establish, quite objectively, that a bodily injury is present;

Secondly,  the  nature  of  the  injury  must  be  proved;  These  are  purely
objective investigations.

Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that particular
bodily  injury,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  was  not  accidental  or  unintentional,  or
that some other kind of injury was intended.

Once  these  three  elements  are  proved  to  be  present,  the  enquiry  proceeds
further and,

Fourthly, it must be proved that the injury of the type just described made up
of  the  three  elements  set  out  above  is  sufficient  to  cause  death  in  the
ordinary-course  of  nature.  This  part  of  the  enquiry  is  purely  objective  and
inferential and has nothing to do with the intention of the offender.

Once these four elements are established by the prosecution (and, of course,
the  burden  is  on  the  prosecution  throughout)  the  offence  is  murder  Under
Section 300 "thirdly". It does not matter that there was no intention to
cause death. It does not matter that there was no intention even to

                                                                           

cause  an  injury  of  a  kind  that  is  sufficient  to  cause  death  in  the
ordinary  course  of  nature  (not  that  there  is  any  real  distinction
between  the  two).  It  does  not  even  matter  that  there  is  no
knowledge  that  an  act  of  that  kind  will  be  likely  to  cause  death.
Once  the  intention  to  cause  the  bodily  injury  actually  found  to  be
present is proved, the rest of the enquiry is purely objective and the
only question is whether, as a matter of purely objective inference,
the  injury  is  sufficient  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  to  cause
death.  No  one  has  a  licence  to  run  around  inflicting  injuries  that  are
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature and claim that they
are not guilty of murder.  If they inflict injuries of that kind, they must
face the consequences; and they can only escape if it can be shown,
or  reasonably  deduced,  that  the  injury  was  accidental  or  otherwise
unintentional.

(Emphasis given by us)

40. In Abdul Waheed Khan the Trial Court convicted three accused under Part I of
Section  304  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  The  High  Court,  on  an  appeal  by  the  State,
convicted  them  for  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  302  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code. This Court discussed Section 300 (thirdly) of the Indian Penal Code, the object
of  the  accused  being  to  rob  the  deceased,  the  grievous  injuries  voluntarily  inflicted
on the deceased, the nature of injuries and then upheld the view taken by the  High
Court.  The  case  did  not  directly  concern  Section  325  or  Section  326  of  the  Indian
Penal Code but was cited, firstly, to explain the analysis undertaken by this Court in
its  earlier  decisions  and  secondly,  to  highlight  that  Section  299  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code  takes  care  of  every  situation  of  culpable  homicide  and  thirdly  and  most
importantly,  to  illustrate  that  voluntarily  causing  grievous  hurt  resulting  in  death
cannot  be  simply  relegated  to  an  offence  punishable  Under  Section  325  or  Section
326 of the Indian Penal Code.

41. Reference  was  also  made  by  learned  amicus  to Thangaiya  v.  State  of  Tamil
Nadu  MANU/SC/1046/2004 : (2005) 9  SCC 650 and Raj  Pal v.  State of  Haryana :  (2006)  9  SCC  678  which  reiterate  the  view  expressed  in
Abdul Waheed Khan.

The jurisprudence

42. A review of the decisions in the first category of cases, indicates that in spite of
the death of a person, and a finding in some of them of an act of voluntarily causing
grievous hurt, this Court has not considered the provisions of Section 299 read with
Section  304  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  In  our  opinion,  such  a  consideration  is
important not only from the jurisprudential point of view but also from the sentencing
point of view.

43. From  the  jurisprudential  point  of  view  it  is  important  because  when  an  act  or
omission of an accused causes the death of any person, he or she is either guilty of
culpable homicide or guilty of not-culpable homicide. It is for the Court to determine
on  the  evidence  whether,  if  it  is  culpable  homicide,  it  amounts  to  murder  as
explained in Section 300 of the Indian Penal Code (along with all its clauses) or not
as explained in Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code. If culpable homicide cannot be
proved, then it would fall in the category of 'not-culpable homicide'.

44. We agree with learned amicus that the sections in the Indian Penal Code relating

                                                                       

to hurt (from Section 319 onwards) do not postulate death as the end result. In this
regard,  our  attention  was  drawn  to  Section  320  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  which
designates  various  kinds  of  hurt  as  grievous  and  particularly  to  'eighthly'  which
relates  to  any  hurt  which  endangers  life,  but  does  not  extinguish  it.  In  fact,  as
pointed out by learned amicus, the arrangement of sections in the Indian Penal Code
makes it clear that 'offences affecting life' are quite distinct from offences of 'hurt'. If
hurt results in death, intended or unintended, the offence would fall in the category
of  an  offence  affecting  life,  else  not.  It  is  this  distinction  that  has  apparently  been
ignored or overlooked in the first category of cases, but as mentioned above, those
cases were decided on their particular facts.

Sentencing

45. The issue of sentencing is also of utmost importance in cases such as the ones
that we have referred to. The reason is the quantum of punishment to be imposed in
a given situation. If an accused is guilty of murder, say Under Section 300 (thirdly)
he or she would be liable for a minimum of life imprisonment; if an accused is guilty
of culpable homicide not amounting to murder Under Section 304 he or she would be
liable  for  a  maximum  of  ten  years  imprisonment;  if  an  accused  is  guilty  of  not-
culpable  homicide  Under  Section  304-A  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  the  punishment
would not exceed two years imprisonment. On the other hand, if the court ignores or
overlooks the question whether the homicide is culpable or not but merely treats the
case  as  one  of  voluntarily  causing  grievous  hurt  punishable  Under  Section  325  or
Section  326  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  for  which  the  maximum  punishment  is  seven
years imprisonment or ten years/life imprisonment (as the case may be), then there
is a real danger in a given case of an accused either getting a lighter sentence than
deserved or a heavier sentence (depending on the offence made out) than warranted
by law. It is for this reason that not only a precise formulation of charges by the Trial
Court (if necessary multiple charges) is essential but also a correct identification by
the court of the offence committed.

Position in law

46. Having considered all the decisions cited before us (and perhaps there are many
more on the subject but not cited), in our opinion, a five-step inquiry is necessary:
(i)  Is  there  a  homicide?  (ii)  If  yes,  is  it  a  culpable  homicide  or  a  'not-culpable
homicide?  (iii)  If  it  is  a  culpable  homicide,  is  the  offence  one  of  culpable  homicide
amounting  to  murder  (Section  300  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code)  or  is  it  a  culpable
homicide not amounting to murder (Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code)? (iv) If it
is  a  'not-culpable  homicide'  then  a  case  Under  Section  304-A  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code is made out. (v) If it is not possible to identify the person who has committed
the homicide, the provisions of Section 72 of the Indian Penal Code may be invoked.
Since this five-pronged exercise has apparently been missed out in the first category
of  decisions,  learned  amicus  was  of  the  opinion  that  those  decisions  require
reconsideration.

47. In  our  view  none  of  the  decisions  require  any  reconsideration.  The  position  in
law  is  as  we  have  culled  out  from  the  cases  cited  before  us  making  it  clear  that  in
most cases the person who has committed homicide (culpable or not culpable) can be
identified.  But  it  is  quite  possible  in  some  cases,  such  as  in Ninaji  Raoji  Boudha
and Ram Lal that conclusive or specific evidence is lacking to actually pin down the
person  who  has  committed  homicide  (culpable  or  not  culpable).  In  such  cases,  the
accused would have to be given the benefit of Section 72 of the Indian Penal Code.

                                                                       

Such cases arise if the investigation is defective or if the evidence is insufficient. But
where  it  is  possible  to  ascertain  who  is  responsible  for  the  homicide,  the  five-step
inquiry can easily be carried out.

Conclusion on facts

48. Applying the five-step inquiry, it is clear that: (i) there was a homicide, namely
the  death  of  Sunderlal;  (ii)  the  assailants  gave  two  lathi  blows  to  Sunderlal  which
resulted  in  the  fracture  of  his  ribs  and  piercing  of  his  lungs.  The  injuries  were  not
accidental  or  unintentional-the  assailants  had  a  common  intention  of  grievously
injuring Sunderlal and it is not as if they intended to cause some injury to him other
that the ones inflicted, (iii) the opinion of Dr. Amar Singh Rathore confirmed that the
injuries  caused  to  Sunderlal  were  sufficient  to  cause  death  in  the  normal  course.
Consequently, the homicide was a culpable homicide. Applying the law laid down in
Virsa Singh it is clear that Ghasi and Lala are guilty of the murder of Sunderlal, the
offence falling  Under  Section 300 (thirdly) of the  Indian  Penal  Code and punishable
Under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.

49. Under the circumstances, we set aside the decision of the High Court and restore
the decision of the Trial Court and convict Ghasi and Lala of the offence of murdering
Sunderlal. The State will take necessary steps to apprehend the convicts so that they
undergo life imprisonment as required by law.

Orders and Record of Proceedings

5 0 . It  may  be  mentioned, en  passant,  that  the  excessive  reporting  of  judgments
(including  orders  and  Record  of  Proceedings)  has  been  described  by  Mr.  Fali  S.
Nariman,  an  eminent  jurist,  in  'India's  Legal  System'  as  "judgments  factory"  and
"case law diarrhoea". He says that there are "just too many judgments reported which
have to be cited, which have to be looked into, followed or distinguished, all of which
take  up  a  vast  amount  of  judicial  time".  The  blame  for  this  lies  partially  on
"overweening judicial vanity", partially on the lawyers who perceive that "everything
that is said in each and every judgment or order of the highest court in any particular
case  has  to  be  presented  as  binding  law"  and  partially  on  competing  law  reporting
agencies  "who  want  their  law  reports  to  sell  as  widely  as  possible".  One  of  his
conclusions  is  that  the  "Laws  proverbial  delays  are  not  because  there  are  too  many
laws but because there are just too many judgments and orders concerning them."

51. If all of us in the fraternity of law desire to bring about some judicial reforms to
ensure expeditious delivery of justice, we need to put our heads together and follow
some  sage  advice  and  take  remedial  action  before  justice  delivery  gets  timed  out.
Delays in our justice delivery have already been adversely commented upon5 and it is
now time for us to find viable and realistic solutions.

52. The appeal is allowed.

1299.  Culpable  homicide.--  Whoever  causes  death  by  doing  an  act  with  the
intention  of  causing  death,  or  with  the  intention  of  causing  such  bodily  injury  as  is
likely  to  cause  death,  or  with  the  knowledge  that  he  is  likely  by  such  act  to  cause
death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Illustrations

                                                                           

(a)  A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or
with the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z believing the ground
to be firm, treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable
homicide.

(b)  A  knows  Z  to  be  behind  a  bush.  B  does  not  know  it.  A,  intending  to  cause,  or
knowing it to be likely to cause  Z's death induces  B to fire at the bush.  B fires and
kills  Z.  Here  B  may  be  guilty  of  no  offence;  but  A  has  committed  the  offence  of
culpable homicide.

(c)  A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills  B, who is behind a
bush; A not knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful act,
he  was  not  guilty  of  culpable  homicide,  as  he  did  not  intend  to  kill  B  or  to  cause
death by doing an act that he knew was likely to cause death.

Explanation 1.--A person who causes bodily injury, to another who is labouring under
a  disorder,  disease  or  bodily  infirmity,  and  thereby  accelerates  the  death  of  that
other, shall be deemed to have caused his death.

Explanation 2.--Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such
bodily  injury  shall  be  deemed  to  have  caused  the  death,  although  by  resorting  to
proper remedies and skilful treatment the death might have been prevented.

Explanation  3.--The  causing  of  the  death  of  a  child  in  the  mother's  womb  is  not
homicide.  But  it  may  amount  to  culpable  homicide  to  cause  the  death  of  a  living
child, if any part of that child has been brought forth, though the child may not have
breathed or been completely born.

304.  Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.--Whoever
commits  culpable  homicide  not  amounting  to  murder,  shall  be  punished  with
imprisonment  for  life,  or  imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is
caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury
as is likely to cause death;

or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
or  with  fine,  or  with  both,  if  the  act  is  done  with  the  knowledge  that  it  is  likely  to
cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury
as is likely to cause death.

2304-A. Causing death by negligence.- Whoever causes the death of any person
by  doing  any  rash  or  negligent  act  not  amounting  to  culpable  homicide  shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

3326.  Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.--
Whoever, except in the case provided for by Section 335, voluntarily causes grievous
hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument
which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or
any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by
means  of  any  explosive  substance,  or  by  means  of  any  substance  which  it  is
deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or
by  means  of  any  animal,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  for  life,  or  with
imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  ten  years,  and

                                                                       

shall also be liable to fine.

4325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.-- Whoever, except in
the  case  provided  for  by  Section  335,  voluntarily  causes  grievous  hurt,  shall  be
punished  with  imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

5William Jack Pike v. The Indian Hotels Co. Ltd. (2013) EWHC 4096 (QB)


                                                                           

