
Appellants: Abhay Singh Chautala

Vs.

Respondent: C.B.I.



JUDGMENT

1 . This  judgment  will  dispose  of  two  Special  Leave  Petitions,  they  being  SLP  (Crl.)
No.  7384  of  2010  and  SLP  (Crl.)  No.  7428  of  2010.  While  Abhay  Singh  Chautala  is
the Petitioner in the first Special Leave Petition, the second one has been filed by Shri
Ajay Singh Chautala. The question involved is identical in both the SL Ps and hence
they are being disposed of by a common judgment.

2. Leave granted in both the Special Leave Petitions.

3 . Whether  the  sanction  under  Section  19  of  The  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act
(hereinafter called "the Act" for short) was necessary against both the Appellants and,
therefore, whether the trial which is in progress against both of them, a valid trial, is
common  question.  This  question  was  raised  before  the  Special  Judge,  CBI  before
whom  the  Appellants  are  being  tried  for  the  offences  under  Sections  13(1)(e)  and
13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act read with Section 109 of Indian Penal Code
in separate trials.

4 . Separate  charge  sheets  were  filed  against  both  the  Appellants  for  the
aforementioned  offences  by  the  CBI.  It  was  alleged  that  both  the  accused  while
working  as  the  Members  of  Legislative  Assembly  had  accumulated  wealth


disproportionate  to  their  known  sources  of  income.  The  charges  were  filed  on  the
basis of the investigations conducted by the CBI. This was necessitated on account of
this  Court's  order  in  Writ  Petition  (Crl.)  No.  93  of  2003  directing  the  CBI  to
investigate  the  JBT  Teachers  Recruitment  Scam.  The  offences  were  registered  on
24.5.2004.  The  CBI  conducted  searches  and  seized  incriminating  documents  which
revealed  that  Shri  Om  Prakash  Chautala  and  his  family  had  acquired  movable  and
immovable properties valued at Rs. 1,467 crores. On this basis a Notification came to
be issued on 22.2.2006 under Sections 5 and 6 of the DSPE Act with the consent of
the Government of Haryana extending powers and jurisdiction under the DSPE Act to
the  State  of  Haryana  for  investigation  of  allegations  regarding  accumulation  of
disproportionate assets by Shri Om Prakash Chautala and his family members under
the Prevention of Corruption Act. A regular First Information Report then came to be
registered against Shri Om Prakash Chautala who is the father of both the Appellants.
It is found that in the check period of 7.6.2000 to 8.3.2005,  Appellant  Abhay  Singh
Chautala  had  amassed  wealth  worth  Rs.  1,19,69,82,619/-  which  was  522.79  %  of
Appellant Abhay Singh Chautala's known sources of income. During the check period,
Shri Abhay Singh Chautala was the Member of the Legislative Assembly Haryana, Rori
Constituency.  Similarly,  in  case  of  Ajay  Singh  Chautala,  his  check  period  was  taken
as 24.5.1993 to 31.5.2006 during which he held the following offices:

1.
2.

3.

4.

2.3.90 to 15.12.92 MLA Vidhan Sabha, Rajasthan
28.12.93 to
MLA Vidhan Sabha, Rajasthan
31.11.98
10.10.99 to
6.2.2004

Member of Parliament, Lok
Sabha from Bhiwani
Constituency
Member of Parliament, Rajya
Sabha

2.8.2004 to
03.11.09

He  was  later  on  elected  as  MLA  from  Dabwali  constituency,  Haryana  in  November,
2009. It was found that he had accumulated wealth worth Rs. 27,74,74,260/- which
was 339.26 % of his known sources of income. It was on this basis that the charge
sheet came to be filed.

5. Admittedly, there is no sanction to prosecute under Section 19 of the Act against
both the Appellants.

6 . An  objection  regarding  the  absence  of  sanction  was  raised  before  the  Special
Judge,  who  in  the  common  order  dated  2.2.2010,  held  that  the  allegations  in  the
charge  sheet  did  not  contain  the  allegation  that  the  Appellants  had  abused  their
current  office  as  member  of  Legislative  Assembly  and,  therefore,  no  sanction  was
necessary.

7. This order was challenged by way of a petition under Section 482 Code of Criminal
Procedure  before  the  High  Court.  The  High  Court  dismissed  the  said  petition  by  the
order dated 8.7.2010.

8. The learned Senior Counsel Shri Mukul Rohtagi as well as Shri U.U. Lalit arguing
for  the  Appellants,  urged  that  on  the  day  when  the  charges  were  framed  or  on  any
date  when  the  cognizance  was  taken,  both  the  Appellants  were  admittedly  public
servants  and,  therefore,  under  the  plain  language  of  Section  19(1)  of  the  Act,  the
Court  could  not  have  taken  cognizance  unless  there  was  a  sanction.  The  learned
senior counsel analyzed the whole Section closely and urged that in the absence of a
sanction, the cognizance of the offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act could
not  have  been  taken.  In  this  behalf,  learned  senior  counsel  further  urged  that  the

                                                                             

this  Court 

v.  State  of  Punjab
judgment  of 
MANU/SC/5415/2006 : 2007 (1) SCC 1 as also the relied on judgment in RS  Nayak
v.  A  R.  Antulay  MANU/SC/0102/1984  :  1984  (2)  SCC  183  were  not  correct  and
required reconsideration and urged for a reference to a Larger Bench.

in Prakash  Singh  Badal 

9 . Against  these  two  judgments  as  also  the  judgments  in Balakrishnan  Ravi
Menon  v.  Union of India 2007 (1)  SCC 45,  K.  Karunakaran  v.  State of  Kerala
MANU/SC/8744/2006 : 2007 (1) SCC 59 and Habibullah Khan  v.  State of  Orissa
and Anr. MANU/SC/0218/1995 : 1995 (2) SCC 437, this Court had clearly laid down
the  law  and  had  held  that  where  the  public  servant  had  abused  the  office  which  he
held  in  the  check  period  but  had  ceased  to  hold  "that  office"  or  was  holding  a
different office then a sanction would not be necessary. The learned Solicitor General
appearing  for  the  Respondent  urged  that  the  law  on  the  question  of  sanction  was
clear and the whole controversy was set at rest in  A.R.  Antulay's case (cited supra)
which  was  followed  throughout  till  date.  The  Solicitor  General  urged  that  the  said
position  in  law  should  not  be  disturbed  in  view  of  the  principle  of  staire  decicis.
Extensive arguments were presented by both the parties requiring us now to consider
the question.

Section 19 runs as under:

19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.

(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Sections 7,
10,  11,  13  and  15  alleged  to  have  been  committed  by  a  public  servant,
except with the previous sanction, -

(a) In the case of a person who is employed in connection with the
affairs of the Union and is not removable from his office save by or
with the sanction of the Central Government, of that Government;

(b) In the case of a person who is employed in connection with the
affairs  of  a  State  and  is  not  removable  from  his  office  save  by  or
with the sanction of the State Government, of that Government;

(c)  In  the  case  of  any  other  person,  of  the  authority  competent  to
remove him from his office.

(2)  Where  for  any  reason  whatsoever  any  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the
previous sanction as required under Sub-section (1) should be given by the
Central  Government  or  the  State  Government  or  any  other  authority,  such
sanction  shall  be  given  by  that  Government  or  authority  which  would  have
been  competent  to  remove  the  public  servant  from  his  office  at  the  time
when the offence was alleged to have been committed.

(3)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,
1973-

(a) No finding, sentence or order passed by a Special Judge shall be
reversed or altered by a Court in appeal, confirmation or revision on
the ground of the absence of, or any error, omission, irregularity in,
the sanction required under Sub-section (1), unless in the opinion of
that court, a failure of justice has, in fact, been occasioned thereby;
                                                                           

(b) No court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on the ground
of any error, omission or irregularity in the sanction granted by the
authority,  unless  it  is  satisfied  that  such  error,  omission  or
irregularity has resulted in a failure of justice;

(c)  No court shall stay  the  proceedings  under  this  Act  on  any  other
ground and no court shall exercise the powers of revision in relation
to  any  interlocutory  order  passed  in  inquiry,  trial,  appeal  or  other
proceedings.

(4)  In  determining  under  Sub-section  (3)  whether  the  absence  of,  or  any
error, omission or irregularity in, such sanction has occasioned or resulted in
a  failure  of  justice  the  Court  shall  have  regard  to  the  fact  whether  the
objection  could  and  should  have  been  raised  at  any  earlier  stage  in  the
proceedings.

Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, -

(a) Error includes competency of the authority to grant sanction;

(b)  A  sanction  required  for  prosecution  includes  reference  to  any
requirement  that  the  prosecution  shall  be  at  the  instance  of  a
specified authority or with the sanction of a specified person or any
requirement of a similar nature.

1 0 . Shri  Mukul  Rohtagi  and  Shri  U.U.  Lalit,  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  on
behalf of the Appellants, firstly pointed out that the plain meaning of Section 19(1) of
the  Act  is  that  when  any  public  servant  is  tried  for  the  offences  under  the  Act,  a
sanction is a must. The learned senior counsel were at pains to point out that in the
absence of a sanction, no cognizance can be taken against the public servant under
Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 of the Act and thus, a sanction is a must. The learned
senior  counsel  relied  on  the  decision  in Abdul  Wahab  Ansari  v.  State  of  Bihar
MANU/SC/0643/2000 : 2000 (8) SCC 500, more particularly, paragraph 7, as also the
decision  in Baij Nath Prasad Tripathi  v.  State of  Bhopal  MANU/SC/0099/1957 :
1957  (1)  SCR  650.  The  plain  language  of  Section  19(1)  cannot  be  disputed.  The
learned  senior  counsel  argued  that  Section  19(1)  of  the  Act  creates  a  complete
embargo against taking cognizance of the offences mentioned in that Section against
the accused who is a public servant. The learned senior counsel also argued that it is
only when the question arises as to which authority should grant a sanction that the
Sub-section (2) will have to be taken recourse to. However, where there is no duty of
any such nature, the Court will be duty bound to ask for the sanction before it takes
cognizance of the offences mentioned under this Section.

11. As against this, Shri Gopal Subramanium, learned Solicitor General, pointed out
the  decision  in RS  Nayak  v.  A  R.  Antulay  (cited  supra)  and  the  subsequent
in Balakrishnan  Ravi  Menon  v.  Union  of  India  (cited  supra), K.
decisions 
Karunakaran  v.  State  of  Kerala  (cited  supra), Habibullah  Khan  v.  State  of
Orissa  and  Anr.  (cited  supra)  and  lastly,  in  Prakash  Singh  Badal  v.  State  of
Punjab (cited supra).

1 2 . Shri  Mukul  Rohtagi  and  Shri  U.U.  Lalit,  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  on
behalf  of  the  Appellants,  have  no  quarrel  with  the  proposition  that  in  all  the  above
cases,  it  is  specifically  held  that  where  the  alleged  misconduct  is  in  some  different
capacity than the one which is held at the time of taking cognizance, there will be no

                                                                      

necessity to take the sanction.

1 3 . To  get  over  this  obvious  difficulty,  the  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  on
behalf  of  the  Appellants  contended  that  the  basic  decision  in RS  Nayak  v.  A  R.
Antulay  (cited  supra)  was  not  correctly  decided,  inasmuch  as  the  decision  did  not
consider the plain language of the Section which is clear and without any ambiguity.
The learned senior counsel contended that where the language is clear and admits of
no  ambiguity,  the  Court  cannot  reject  the  plain  meaning  emanating  out  of  the
provision. Further, the learned senior counsel pointed out that even in the judgments
following  the  judgment  in RS  Nayak  v.  A  R.  Antulay  (cited  supra)  up  to  the
judgment  in  the  case  of Prakash  Singh  Badal  v.  State  of  Punjab  (cited  supra)
and even thereafter, the learned  Judges  have  not  considered  the  plain  meaning  and
on  that  count,  those  judgments  also  do  not  present  correct  law  and  require
reconsideration. Another substantial challenge to the judgment in RS Nayak v.  A  R.
Antulay  (cited  supra)  is  on  account  of  the  fact  that  the  law  declared  to  the  above
effect in RS Nayak v.  A R. Antulay (cited supra) was obiter dictum, inasmuch as it
was not necessary for the Court to decide the question, more particularly, decided by
the  Courts  in  paragraphs  23  to  26.  The  learned  senior  counsel  pointed  out  that,
firstly, the Court in RS Nayak v. A R. Antulay (cited supra), came to the conclusion
that  Shri  Antulay  who  was  a  Member  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  was  not  a  public
servant. It is contended that once that finding was arrived at, there was no question
of  further  deciding  as  to  whether,  the  accused  being  a  public  servant  in  a  different
capacity, the law required that there had to be a sanction before the Court could take
the cognizance. Learned senior counsel further argued that where the Court makes an
observation  which  is  either  not  necessary  for  the  decision  of  the  court  or  does  not
relate to the material facts in issue, such observation must be held as obiter dictum.
In  support  of  this  proposition,  the  learned  senior  counsel  relied  on  the  decision  in
Director of Settlement, State of A.P. v.  M.R. Apparao MANU/SC/0219/2002 : 2002
v.  Ranbir  @  Rana
(4)  SCC  638 
MANU/SC/1877/2006  :  2006  (5)  SCC  167, Division  Controller,  KSRTC  v.
Mahadeva  Shetty and  Anr.  MANU/SC/0529/2003  :  2003  (7)  SCC  197  (Paragraph
23), H.H.  Maharajadhiraja  Mahdav  Rao  Jiwaji  Rao  Scindia  Bahadur  v. Union
of India  MANU/SC/0050/1970  :  AIR  1971  SC  530  (Paragraph  325  onwards), State
of Orissa v.  Sudhansu Sekhar Misra MANU/SC/0047/1967 : AIR 1968 SC 647 (in
which the celebrated decision in Quinn v. Leathem 1901 AC 495) was relied on and
ADM Jabalpur etc. v.  Shivkant Shukla MANU/SC/0062/1976 : 1976 (2) SCC 521
etc.  The  learned  senior  counsel  also  argued  that  the  whole  class  of  public  servant
would  be  deprived  of  the  protection  if  the  decision  in RS  Nayak  v.  A  R.  Antulay
(cited supra) is followed. For this purpose, learned senior counsel argued that in such
case, public servants would be exposed to frivolous prosecutions which would have
disastrous  effects  on  their  service  careers,  though  they  are  required  to  be  insulated
against  such  false,  frivolous  and  motivated  complaints  of  wrong  doing.  It  is  then
argued that the decision in K. Veeraswami v.  Union of India MANU/SC/0610/1991
:  1991  (3)  SCC  655  has  in  fact  removed  the  very  foundation  of  the  decision  in RS
Nayak  v.  A.R.  Antulay  (cited  supra)  in  respect  of  the  sanction.  It  is  also  argued
that,  in  effect,  the  decision  in RS  Nayak  v.  A  R.  Antulay  (cited  supra)  has  added
further proviso to the effect "provided that nothing in this Sub-section shall apply to
a case where at the time of cognizance, the public servant is holding a different post
with  a  different  removing  authority  from  the  one  in  which  the  offence  is  alleged  to
have  been  committed".  It  is  argued  that  such  an  addition  would  be  clearly
impermissible as it would negate the very foundation of criminal law which requires a
strict interpretation in favour of  the  accused  and  not  an  interpretation  which  results
into  deprivation  of  the  accused  of  his  statutory  rights.  The  decision  in S.A.

(Paragraph  7), State  of  Haryana 


Venkataraman  v. State  MANU/SC/0029/1957  :  AIR  1958  SC  107  is  also  very
heavily  relied  upon,  more  particularly,  the  observations  in  paragraphs  14  and  16
thereof.

14. It will be, therefore, our task to see as to whether the judgment in A.R. Antulay's
case (cited supra) and the law decided therein, particularly in paragraphs 24, 25 and
26 is obiter. Paragraphs 24, 25 and 26 are as under:

24. Now if the public servant holds two offices and he is accused of having
abused  one  and  from  which  he  is  removed  but  continues  to  hold  the  other
which is neither alleged to have been used nor abused, is a sanction of the
authority  competent  to  remove  him  from  the  office  which  is  neither  alleged
or shown to have been abused or misused necessary? The submission is that
if  the  harassment  of  the  public  servant  by  a  frivolous  prosecution  and
criminal waste of his time in law courts keeping him away from discharging
public  duty,  are  the  objects  underlying  Section  6,  the  same  would  be
defeated if it is held that the sanction of the latter authority is not necessary.
The submission does not commend to use. We fail to see how the competent
authority entitled to remove the public servant from an office which is neither
alleged  to  have  been  used  or  abused  would  be  able  to  decide  whether  the
prosecution  is  frivolous  or  tendentious.  An  illustration  was  posed  to  the
learned Counsel that a Minister who is indisputably a public servant greased
his  palms  by  abusing  his  office  as  Minister,  and  then  ceased  to  hold  the
office  before  the  court  was  called  upon  to  take  cognizance  of  the  offence
against him and therefore, sanction as contemplated by Section 6 would not
be  necessary;  but  if  after  committing  the  offence  and  before  the  date  of
taking of cognizance of the offence, he was elected as a Municipal President
in which capacity he was a public servant under the relevant  Municipal law,
and  was  holding  that  office  on  the  date  on  which  court  proceeded  to  take
cognizance of the offence committed by him as a Minister, would a sanction
be  necessary  and  that  too  of  that  authority  competent  to  remove  him  from
the office of the Municipal President. The answer was- in affirmative. But the
very  illustration  would  show  that  such  cannot  be  the  law.  Such  an
interpretation  of  Section  6  would  render  it  as  a  shield  to  an  unscrupulous
public  servant.  Someone  interested  in  protecting  may  shift  him  from  one
office of public servant to another and thereby defeat the process of law. Ode
can  legitimately  envisage  a  situation  wherein  a  person  may  hold  a  dozen
different  offices,  each  one  clothing  him  with  the  status  of  a  public  servant
under  Section  21  IPC  and  even  if  he  has  abused  only  one  office  for  which
either there is a valid sanction to prosecute him or he has ceased to hold that
office  by  the  time  court  was  called  upon  to  take  cognizance,  yet  on  this
assumption, sanction of 11 different competent authorities each of which was
entitled  to  remove  him  from  11  different  public  offices  would  be  necessary
before the court can take cognizance of the offence committed by such public
servant/while abusing one office which he may have ceased to hold. Such an
interpretation in contrary to all canons of construction and leads to an absurd
and product which of necessity must be avoided. Legislation must at all costs
be interpreted in such a way that it would not operate as a rougue's charter.
(See Davis and Sons Ltd. v. Atkins (1977) ICR 662

25. Support was sought to be drawn for the submission from the decision of
the  Andhra  Pradesh  High  Court  in Air  Commodore  Kailash  Chand  v. The
State  (S.P.E.  Hyderabad) (1973)  2  AWR  263 and  the  affirmance  of  that

                                                                       

this  Court 

in The  State  (S.P.E.  Hyderabad) 

v. Air
decision  by 
Commodore  Kailash  Chand  MANU/SC/0252/1979  :  1980  Cri  LJ  393.  In
that  case  accused  Kailash  Chand  was,  a  member  of  the  Indian  Air  Force
having  entered  the  service  on  17th  November  1941.  He  retired  from  the
service on 15th June, 1965, but was re-employed for a period of 2 years with
effect  from  16th  June,  1965.  On  7th  September,  1966,  the  Respondent  was
transferred to the  Regular  Air  Force  Reserve with effect from  June 16, 1965
to  June 15, 1970 i.e. for a period of 5 years.  On 13th  March,  1968,  the  re-
employment given to the Respondent ceased and his service was terminated
with effect from April 1, 1968. A charge-sheet was submitted against him for
having  committed  an  offence  under  Section  5(2)  of  the  Prevention  of
Corruption Act, 1947 during the period March 29, 1965 to March 16, 1967. A
contention was raised on behalf of the accused that the court could not take
cognizance of the offence in the absence of a valid sanction of the authority
competent  to  remove  him  from  the  office  held  by  him  as  a  public  servant.
The  learned  special  Judge  negatived  the  contention.  In  the  revision  petition
filed by the accused in the High Court, the learned Single Judge held that on
the date of taking cognizance of the offence, the accused was a member of
the  Regular  Air  Force  Reserve  set  up  under  the  Reserve  and  Auxiliary  Air
Force, 1952 and the rules made there under. Accordingly, it was held that a
sanction  to  prosecute  him  was  necessary  and  in  the  absence  of  which  the
court  could  not  the  cognizance  of  the  offences  and  the  prosecution  was
quashed.  In  the  appeal  by  certificate,  this  Court  upheld  the  decision  of  the
High  Court.  This  Court  held  following  the  decision  in  S.A.  Venkataraman's
case that if the public servant had ceased to be a public servant at the time
of taking cognizance of the offence, Section 6 is not attracted. Thereafter the
court proceeded to examine whether the accused was a public servant on the
date when the court took cognizance of the offence and concluded that once
the  accused  was  transferred  to  the  Auxiliary  Air  Force,  he  retained  his
character  as  a  public  servant  because  he  was  required  to  undergo  training
and to be called up for service as and when required. The court further held
that  as  such  the  accused  was  a  public  servant  as  an  active  member  of  the
Indian  Air  Force  and  a  sanction  to  prosecute  him  under  Section  6  was
necessary.  This  decision  is  of  no  assistance  for  the  obvious  reason  that
nowhere it was contended before the court, which office was alleged to have
been abused by the accused and whether the two offices were separate and
distinct. It is not made clear whether the accused continued to hold the office
which was alleged to have been abused or misused even at the time of taking
cognizance of the offence. But that could not be so because the service of the
accused was terminated on April 1, 1968 while the cognizance was sought to
be  taken  in  June,  1969.  Indisputably,  the  accused  had  ceased  to  hold  that
office as public servant which he was alleged to have misused or abused. The
court was however, not invited to consider the contention canvassed before
us:  Nor  was  the  court  informed  specifically  whether  the  subsequent  office
held  by  the  accused  in  that  case  was  the  same  from  which  his  service  was
terminated  meaning  thereby  he  was  re-employed  to  the  same  office.  The
decision appears to proceed on the facts of the case. We would however, like
to make it abundantly clear that if the two decisions purport to lay down that
even if a public servant has ceased to hold that office as public servant which
he is alleged to have abused or misused for corrupt motives, but on the date
of taking cognizance of an offence alleged to have been committed by him as

                                                                           

a public servant which he ceased to be and holds an entirely different public
office  which  he  is  neither  alleged  to  have  misused  or  abused  for  corrupt
motives,  yet  the  sanction  of  authority  competent  to  remove  him  from  such
latter  office  would  be  necessary  before  taking  cognizance  of  the  offence
alleged to have been committed by the public servant while holding an office
which he is alleged to have abused or misused and which he has ceased to
hold,  the  decisions  in  our  opinion,  do  not  lay  down  the  correct  law  and
cannot be accepted as making a correct interpretation of Section 6.

26. Therefore,  upon  a  true  construction  of  Section  6,  it  is  implicit  therein
that Sanction of that competent authority alone would be necessary which is
competent to remove the public servant from the office which he is alleged to
have  misused  or  abused  for  corrupt  motive  and  for  which  a  prosecution  is
intended to be launched against him.

15. It  is  clear  from  these  paragraphs  that  the  law  laid  down  in Air  Commodore
Kailash Chand v.  The State (S.P.E. Hyderabad) (1973) 2 AWR 263 was taken into
consideration. The Court has also quoted S.A. Venkataraman's case (cited supra) and
the decision in Kailash Chand's case (cited supra) was distinguished by holding thus:

This decision is of no assistance for the obvious reason that nowhere it was
contended before the court, which office was alleged to have been abused by
the accused and whether the two offices were separate and distinct. It is not
made  clear  whether  the  accused  continued  to  hold  the  office  which  was
alleged  to  have  been  abused  or  misused  even  at  the  time  of  taking
cognizance of the offence. But that could not be so because the service of the
accused was terminated on April 1, 1968 while the cognizance was sought to
be  taken  in  June,  1969.  Indisputably,  the  accused  had  ceased  to  hold  that
office as public servant which he was alleged to have misused or abused. The
court was however, not invited to consider the contention canvassed before
us:  Nor  was  the  court  informed  specifically  whether  the  subsequent  office
held  by  the  accused  in  that  case  was  the  same  from  which  his  service  was
terminated  meaning  thereby  he  was  re-employed  to  the  same  office.  The
decision appears to proceed on the facts of the case.

16. The  propositions  argued  by  the  learned  Solicitor  General  have,  therefore,  been
totally accepted. However, that does not solve the question. The question is whether
these  propositions  amount  to  obiter.  The  learned  senior  counsel  for  the  Appellants
insists that it was not at all necessary for the Court to make these observations as the
Court had answered the question whether A.R. Antulay in his capacity as an MLA, was
a  public  servant,  in  negative.  The  learned  senior  counsel  argued  that  once  it  was
found that Antulay in his capacity as an MLA, was not a public servant, it was not at
all necessary for the Court to go further and probe a further question as to whether a
public servant who has abused a particular office ceased to hold that office and held
some  other  office  on  the  date  of  cognizance  would  still  require  sanction  for  his
prosecution for the offence under the Act. The argument is extremely attractive on the
face  of  it  because  indeed  in  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  such  a  finding  that  Shri
Antulay in his capacity is an MLA was not a public servant was unequivocally given.
However,  we  do  not  agree  to  the  proposition  that  the  Court  could  not  have  gone
further  and  recorded  its  finding  in  paragraphs  23  to  26  as  they  did.  It  is  necessary
firstly  to  note  paragraph  15  which  gives  a  clear  cut  idea  as  to  what  was  the  exact
controversy therein and how the rival parties addressed Courts on various questions.
Paragraph 15 is as under:

1 5 . The  Appellant,  the  original  complainant,  contends  that  the  learned
special  Judge  was  in  error  in  holding  that  M.L.A.  is  a  public  servant  within
the  meaning  of  the  expression  under  Section  21(12)(a).  The  second
submission  was  that  if  the  first  question  is  answered  in  the  affirmative,  it
would  be  necessary  to  examine  whether  a  sanction  as  contemplated  by
Section  6  is  necessary.  If  the  answer  to  the  second  question  is  in  the
affirmative  it.  would  be  necessary  to  identify  the  sanctioning  authority. The
broad sweep of the argument was that the complainant in his complaint has
alleged that the accused abused his office of Chief Minister and not his office,
if  any,  as  M.L.A.  and  therefore,  even  if  on  the  date  of  taking  cognizance  of
the offence the accused was M.L.A, nonetheless no sanction to prosecute him
is necessary as envisaged by Section 6 of the 1947 Act. It was urged that as
the  allegation  against  the  accused  in  the  complaint  is  that  he  abused  or
misused  his  office  as  Chief  Minister  and  as  by  the  time  the  complaint  was
filed and cognizance was taken, he had ceased to hold the office of the Chief
Minister no sanction under Section 6 was necessary to prosecute him for the
offences  alleged  to  have  been  committed  by  him  when  the  accused  was
admittedly a public servant in his capacity as Chief Minister.

(Emphasis supplied).

Therefore, it will be clear that the complainant's main argument was the abuse of the
office of Chief Minister which the accused ceased to hold and hence no sanction was
necessary. In that the complainant proceeded on the premise that the accused as the
MLA was a public servant.

17. In  paragraph  16  the  contention  of  the  accused  is  noted  which  suggests  that  he
was a public servant within the contemplation of Clauses (3) and (7) of Section 21 of
IPC as also under Section 21(12)(a). In fact it was the argument of accused by way
of the next claim that if the accused holds plurality of offices each of which confers
the status of a public servant and even if it is alleged that he has abused or misused
one office as a public servant notwithstanding the fact that there was no allegation of
the  abuse  or  misuse  of  other  office  held  as  public  servant,  the  sanction  of  each
authority competent to remove him from each of the offices would be a sine qua non
under  Section  6  before  a  valid  prosecution  can  be  launched  against  the  accused.
Therefore, the question of accused being a public servant was inextricably mixed with
the question of the office which accused was alleged to have misused. There was no
dichotomy between the two questions. Strangely enough, the accused claimed to be a
public  servant,  unlike  the  present  case  and  it  was  on  that  premise  that  the  accused
had raised a question that there would have to be the sanction qua each office that he
continued to hold on the date when the cognizance was taken. In the present case, it
is not disputed that the accused was a public servant. Undoubtedly they were public
v. State
servants.  By 
MANU/SC/0293/1998  :  1998  (4)  SCC  626  it  has  been  clearly  held  now  that  the
Members of Legislative Assembly and the Members of Parliament are public servants.
Therefore,  the  question  which  was  addressed  in  that  case  by  the  accused  claiming
himself  to  be  a  public  servant  is  an  identical  question  which  fell  for  consideration
before  the  High  Court  as  also  before  us.  In  paragraph  17,  the  Court  formulated  the
questions to be decided precisely on the basis of the contention raised by the accused
in that case. Following were those questions:

in P.V.  Narsimha  Rao 

the  subsequent 

judgment 

(a)  What  is  the  relevant  date  with  reference  to  which  a  valid  sanction  is  a
pre-requisite for the prosecution of a public servant for offences enumerated

                                                                        

in Section 6 of the 1947 Act?

(b)  If the accused holds  plurality  of  offices  occupying  each  of  which  makes
him  a  public  servant,  is  sanction  of  each  one  of  the  competent  authorities
entitled  to  remove  him  from  each  one  of  the  offices  held  by  him  necessary
and if anyone of the competent authorities fails or declines to grant sanction,
is  the  Court  precluded  or  prohibited  from  taking  cognizance  of  the  offence
with which the public servant is charged?

(c) Is it implicit in Section 6 of the 1947 Act that sanction of that competent
authority  alone  is  necessary,  which  is  entitled  to  remove  the  public  servant
from the office which is alleged to have been abused for misused for corrupt
motives?

(d) Is M.L.A. a public servant within the meaning of the expression in Section
21(12)(a) IPC?

(e)  Is  M.L.A.  a  public  servant  within  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  in
Section 21(3) and Section 21(7) IPC?

(f)  Is  sanction  as  contemplated  by  Section  6  of  the  1947  Act  necessary  for
prosecution of M.L.A.?

(g)  If  the  answer  to  (f)  is  in  the  affirmative,  which  is  the  Sanctioning
Authority  competent  to  remove  M.L.A.  from  the  office  of  Member  of  the
Legislative Assembly?

18. It will be seen from the nature of the questions that the whole controversy was
covered  by  those  questions  particularly,  the  question  raised  in  (b),  (c),  (d)  and  (e)
were nothing but the result of the contentions raised by the parties which directly fell
for consideration.

19. The Court answered the first question that the relevant date of sanction would be
the date on which the cognizance was taken of the offence. Since in paragraph 23 to
26 the  Court found that the accused in that case did not continue to hold the office
that  he  had  allegedly  abused  on  the  date  of  cognizance,  there  was  no  necessity  of
granting  any  sanction.  The  Court  held  so  in  paragraph  27  in  the  most  unequivocal
terms.  The  Court  goes  on  to  record  "therefore,  it  is  crystal  clear  that  the  complaint
filed against the accused charged him with criminal abuse or misuse of only his office
as  Chief  Minister.  By  the  time,  the  court  was  called  upon  to  take  cognizance  of  the
offences, so alleged in the complaint, the accused had ceased to hold the office of the
Chief Minister. On this short ground, it can be held that no sanction to prosecute him
was necessary as former Chief Minister of Maharashtra State. The appeal can succeed
on this short ground."

(Emphasis supplied).
20. However, subsequently, the question whether an  MLA was a public servant was
also canvassed at length. The Court then went on to examine the question in further
paragraphs and came to the conclusion that MLA was not a public servant which law
was,  of  course  thereafter,  upset  in  Narsimha  Rao's  case  (cited  supra).  It  cannot  be
said that the question decided by the Court regarding the abuse of a particular office
and the effects of the accused not continuing with that office or holding an altogether
different office was obiter.  In fact it is on that very basis that the judgment of  A.R.

                                                                       

Antulay (cited supra) proceeded. The question of MLA not being a public servant was
decided as a subsidiary question.

21. This finding of ours is buttressed by the decision reported in Balakrishnan Ravi
Menon  v.  Union  of  India  (cited  supra)  which  decision  came  almost  immediately
after Prakash  Singh  Badal  v.  State  of  Punjab  (cited  supra)  case.  Whether  the
finding  given  in  the  judgment  of  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  was  obiter  was  the
question that directly fell for consideration in that case. This Court quoted paragraph
24 of the judgment in Antulay's case (cited supra) so also some portion of paragraph
25.  It is on the basis of these two paragraphs that the  Court unequivocally rejected
the  contention  that  the  finding  given  in  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  regarding  the
abuse of office of Chief Minister was obiter. Therefore, it would not be possible for us
to hold that the finding given in Antualy's case (cited supra) was an obiter. We must
point out at this juncture that in Antulay's case (cited supra) the Court first went on
to decide the basic question that if the accused did not continue with the office that
he  had  allegedly  abused  on  the  day  cognizance  was  taken,  then  there  was  no
requirement of sanction.

2 2 . This  finding  was  given  as  the  complainant  in  that  case  had  canvassed  in  the
backdrop  of  the  judgment  of  the  trial  Court  discharging  the  accused  holding  him  to
be a public servant. The trial Court had held that in the absence of such sanction, the
accused was entitled to be discharged.  The complainant filed a writ petition against
this  order.  This  Court  had  permitted  to  file  a  criminal  revision  against  the  order  of
learned  Special  Judge perhaps being of the opinion that the writ petition did not lie
and  ultimately  this  Court  transferred  the  criminal  revision  against  the  trial  Court's
judgment here.  The complainant, therefore, had specifically and basically raised the
point  that  since  the  accused  had  ceased  to  hold  the  office  of  Chief  Minister  on  the
date  of  cognizance,  there  was  no  question  of  any  sanction  and  that  was  the  main
issue which was decided in Antulay's case (cited supra) as the basic issue by way of
question No. (b)

23. We, therefore, do not think the finding given in Antulay's case (cited supra) was
in any manner obiter and requires reconsideration. Learned Senior Counsel relied on
the decision in Marta Silva and Ors. v.  Piedade Cardazo and Ors. AIR 1969 Goa
94,  State  of  A.P.  v.  M.R.  Apparao  (cited  supra], State  of  Haryana  v. Ranbir
alias  Rana  (cited  supra], Division  Controller,  KSRTC  v.  Mahadeva  Shetty and
Anr.  (cited  supra), H.H.  Maharajadhiraja  Madhav  Rao  Jiwaji  Rao  Scindia
Bahadur  v.  Union of  India  (cited  supra), State of  Orissa  v.  Sudhansu  Sekhar
Misra  (cited  supra)  and  lastly ADM,  Jabalpur  etc.  v.  Shivkant  Shukla  (cited
supra]  and  contended  that  the  principles  of  obiter  dicta  in  the  aforementioned
decisions  would  apply  to  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  also.  We  have  already  shown
that the principles regarding the abuse of a particular office, decided in Antulay's case
(cited supra), could not be termed as Obiter dicta. We have nothing to say about the
principles in the aforementioned decisions. However, in the circumstances, which we
have  shown  above,  all  these  cases  would  be  of  no  help  to  the  Appellants  herein,
particularly  in  the  light  of  our  conclusion  that  the  principles  arrived  at  in  Antulay's
case  (cited  supra)  could  not  be  termed  as  obiter  dicta.  We,  therefore,  reject  the
argument on that count.

24. There  is  one  more  reason,  though  not  a  major  one,  for  not  disturbing  the  law
settled  in  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra).  That  decision  has  stood  the  test  of  time  for
last  over  25  years  and  it  is  trite  that  going  as  per  the  maxim  stare  decisis  et  non
quieta movere, it would be better to stand by that decision and not to disturb what is

                                                              

settled.  This  rule  of  interpretation  was  approved  of  by  Lord  Coke  who  suggested  -
"those things which have been so often adjudged ought to rest in peace". This Court
i n Shanker  Raju  v.  Union  of  India  MANU/SC/0009/2011  :  2011  (2)  SCC  132,
confirmed  this  view  while  relying  on  the  decision  in Tiverton  Estates  Ltd.  v.
Wearwell  Ltd.  1974  (1)  WLR  176  and  more  particularly,  the  observations  of
Scarman,  L.J.,  while  not  agreeing  with  the  view  of  Lord  Denning,  M.R.  about
desirability of not accepting previous decisions. The observations are to the following
effect:

... I decline to accept his lead only because I think it damaging to the law to
the long term - though it would undoubtedly do justice in the present case.
To  some  it  will  appear  that  justice  is  being  denied  by  a  timid,  conservative
adherence  to  judicial  precedent.  They  would  be  wrong.  Consistency  is
necessary to certainty - one of the great objectives of law.

The Court also referred to the following other cases:

Waman Rao  v.  Union of India MANU/SC/0091/1980 : 1981 (2)  SCC 362,
Manganese Ore (India) Ltd. v. CST MANU/SC/0439/1975 : 1976 (4) SCC
124, Ganga  Sugar  Corpn.  v.  State  of  U.P.  MANU/SC/0397/1979  :  1980
(1)  SCC  223, Union  of  India  v.  Raguhbir  Singh  MANU/SC/0619/1989  :
India
1989 
MANU/SC/0317/1990  :  1990  (4)  SCC  207, Union  of  India  v. Paras
Laminates  (P)  Ltd.  MANU/SC/0173/1991  :  1990  (4)  SCC  453  and  lastly,
Hari Singh v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0520/1993 : 1993 (3) SCC 114.

754, Krishena  Kumar 

v.  Union  of 

(2) 

SCC 

We  respectfully  agree  with  the  law  laid  down  in Shanker  Raju  v.  Union  of  India
(cited  supra)  and  acting  on  that  decision,  desist  from  disturbing  the  settled  law  in
Antulay's case (cited supra). We have in the earlier part of the judgment, pointed out
as to how the decision in Antulay's case (cited supra) has been followed right up to
the  decision  in Prakash  Singh  Badal  v.  State  of  Punjab  (cited  supra)  and  even
thereafter.

25. This  leaves  us  with  the  other  contention  raised  by  learned  Senior  Counsel  Shri
Mukul  Rohtagi  as  well  as  Shri  U.U.  Lalit  arguing  for  the  Appellants.  The  learned
senior  counsel  contended  that  the  decision  in  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  is  hit  by
the  doctrine  of  per  incuriam.  The  learned  senior  counsel  heavily  relied  on  the
in Punjab  Land  Development  Reclamation  Corporation  Ltd.  v.
decision 
Presiding Officer MANU/SC/0479/1990 : 1990 (3) SCC 682 and Nirmal Jeet Kaur
v. State of M.P. MANU/SC/0695/2004 : 2004 (7) SCC 558 to explain the doctrine of
per  incuriam.  We  have  absolutely  no  quarrel  with  the  principles  laid  down  in  those
two  cases.  However,  we  feel  that  the  resultant  argument  on  the  part  of  the  learned
senior counsel is not correct. In support of their argument, the learned senior counsel
contended that in  Antulay's case (cited supra),  Section 6(2) of the  Act, as it therein
existed,  was  ignored.  In  short,  the  argument  was  that  Section  6(2)  which  is
parimateria with Section 19(2) of the Act provides that in case of doubt as to which
authority should give the sanction, the time when the offence is alleged to have been
committed  is  relevant.  The  argument  further  goes  on  to  suggest  that  if  that  is  so,
then the Act expressly contemplates that a public servant may be holding office in a
different  capacity  from  the  one  that  he  was  holding  when  the  offence  is  alleged  to
have  been  committed  at  the  time  when  cognizance  is  taken  so  as  to  cause  doubt
about the sanctioning authority. Thus, there would be necessity of a sanction on the
date  of  cognizance  and,  therefore,  in  ignoring  this  aspect,  the  decision  in  Antulay's

                                                                           

case  (cited  supra)  has  suffered  an  illegality.  Same  is  the  argument  in  the  present
case.

26. This argument is basically incorrect. In Antulay's case (cited supra), it is not as if
Section 6(2) of the Act as it then existed, was ignored or was not referred to, but the
Constitution  Bench  had  very  specifically  made  a  reference  to  and  had  interpreted
Section  6  as  a  whole.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Constitution  Bench  had
totally ignored the provisions of Section 6 and more particularly, Section 6(2). Once
the  Court had held that if the public servant had abused a particular office and was
not holding that office on the date of taking cognizance, there would be no necessity
to obtain sanction. It was obvious that it was not necessary for the Court to go up to
Section  6(2)  as  in  that  case,  there  would  be  no  question  of  doubt  about  the
sanctioning  authority.  In  our  opinion  also,  Section  6(2)  of  the  Act,  which  is
parimateria  to  Section  19(2),  does  not  contemplate  a  situation  as  is  tried  to  be
argued by the learned senior counsel. We do not agree with the proposition that the
Act expressly contemplates that a public servant may be holding office in a different
capacity from the one that he was holding when the offence is alleged to have been
committed  at  the  time  when  cognizance  is  taken.  That  is  not,  in  our  opinion,  the
eventuality  contemplated  in  Section  6(2)  or  Section  19(2),  as  the  case  may  be.  In
Antulay's  case  (cited  supra),  the  Court  went  on  to  hold  that  where  a  public  servant
holds a different capacity altogether from the one which he is alleged to have abused,
there  would  be  no  necessity  of  sanction  at  all.  This  view  was  taken  on  the  specific
interpretation of Section 6 generally and more particularly, Section 6(1)(c), which is
parimateria  to  Section  19(1)(c)  of  the  Act.  Once  it  was  held  that  there  was  no
necessity  of  sanction  at  all,  there  would  be  no  question  of  there  being  any  doubt
arising about the sanctioning authority. The doubt expressed in Section 19(2), in our
opinion,  is  not  a  pointer  to  suggest  that  a  public  servant  may  have  abused  any
particular  office,  but  when  he  occupies  any  other  office  subsequently,  then  the
sanction  is  a  must.  That  will  be  the  incorrect  reading  of  the  Section.  The  Section
simply  contemplates  a  situation  where  there  is  a  genuine  doubt  as  to  whether
sanctioning authority should be the Central Government or the State Government or
any authority competent to remove him. The words in Section 19(2) are to be read in
conjunction with Sections 19(1)(a), 19(1)(b) and 19(1)(c). These clauses only fix the
sanctioning  authority  to  be  the  authority  which  is  capable  of  "removing  a  public
servant".  Therefore, in our opinion, the argument based on the language of  Section
6(2) or as the case may be, Section 19(2), is not correct. This eventuality has been
considered,  though  not  directly,  in  paragraph  24  in  the  judgment  in  Antulay's  case
(cited supra), in the following manner:

24 .... An illustration was posed to the learned Counsel that a Minister who is
indisputably  a  public  servant  greased  his  palms  by  abusing  his  office  as
Minister, and then ceased to hold the office before the court was called upon
to  take  cognizance  of  the  offence  against  him  and  therefore,  sanction  as
contemplated  by  Section  6  would  not  be  necessary;  but  if  after  committing
the  offence  and  before  the  date  of  taking  of  cognizance  of  the  offence,  he
was  elected  as  a  Municipal  President  in  which  capacity  he  was  a  public
servant under the relevant Municipal law, and was holding that office on the
date on which court proceeded to take cognizance of the offence committed
by  him  as  a  Minister,  would  a  sanction  be  necessary  and  that  too  of  that
authority  competent  to  remove  him  from  the  office  of  the  Municipal
President.  The  answer  was-  in  affirmative.  But  the  very  illustration  would
show that such cannot be the law. Such an interpretation of Section 6 would
render it as a shield to an unscrupulous public servant.  Someone interested
                                                                       

in protecting may shift him from one office of public servant to another and
thereby defeat the process of law. One can legitimately envisage a situation
wherein a person may hold a dozen different offices, each one clothing him
with the status of a public servant under  Section 21  IPC and even if he has
abused only one office for which either there is a valid sanction to prosecute
him or he has ceased to hold that office by the time court was called upon to
take cognizance, yet on this assumption, sanction of 11 different competent
authorities each of which was entitled to remove him from 11 different public
offices  would  be  necessary  before  the  court  can  take  cognizance  of  the
offence committed by such public servant/while abusing one office which he
may have ceased to hold. Such an interpretation in contrary to all canons of
construction and leads to an absurd and product which of necessity must be
avoided.  Legislation  must  at  all  costs  be  interpreted  in  such  a  way  that  it
would not operate as a rougue's charter

(emphasis supplied)

27. It is in the light of this that the  Court did not have to specify as to under what
circumstances  would  a  duty  arise  for  locating  the  authority  to  give  sanction.  The
doubt could arise in more manners than one and in more situations than one, but to
base  the  interpretation  of  Section  19(1)  of  the  Act  on  the  basis  of  Section  19(2)
would  be  putting  the  cart  before  the  horse.  The  two  Sections  would  have  to  be
interpreted in a rational manner. Once the interpretation is that the prosecution of a
public servant holding a different capacity than the one which he is alleged to have
abused, there is no question of going to Section 6(2)/19(2) at all in which case there
will  be  no  question  of  any  doubt.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  interpretation  of  Section
6(1) or, as the case may be, Section 19(1), is on the basis of the expression "office"
in three sub-clauses of Section 6(1), or the case may be, Section 19(1). For all these
reasons, therefore, we are not persuaded to accept the contention that Antulay's case
(cited supra) was decided per incuriam of Section 6(2). In our opinion, the decision
i n K.  Veeraswami  v.  Union  of  India  (cited  supra)  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  P.V.
Narsimha  Rao's  case  (cited  supra)  are  not  apposite  nor  do  they  support  the
contention  raised  by  the  learned  senior  counsel  as  regards  Antulay's  case  (cited
supra) being per incuriam of Section 6(2).

28. The learned Senior Counsel Shri Mukul Rohtagi as well as Shri U.U. Lalit arguing
for  the  Appellants,  in  support  of  their  argument  that  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)
require  reconsideration,  urged  that  that  interpretation  deprives  the  entire  class  of
public  servants  covered  by  the  clear  words  of  Section  6(1)/19(1)  of  a  valuable
protection.  It  was  further  urged  that  such  interpretation  would  have  a  disastrous
effect on the careers of the public servants and the object of law to insulate a public
servant  from  false,  frivolous,  malicious  and  motivated  complaints  of  wrong  doing
would  be  defeated.  It  was  also  urged  that  such  interpretation  would  amount  to  re-
writing of Section 19(1) and as if a proviso would be added to Section 19(1) to the
following effect:

Provided that nothing in this  Sub-section shall apply to a case where at the
time  of  cognizance,  the  public  servant  is  holding  a  different  post  with  a
different removing authority from the one in which the offence is alleged to
have been committed.

Lastly, it was urged that such an interpretation would negate the very foundation of
criminal law, which requires a strict interpretation in favour of the accused.  Most of
these  questions  are  already  answered,  firstly,  in  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  and


secondly, in  Prakash Singh Badal v.  State of Punjab (cited supra). Therefore, we
need  not  dilate  on  them.  We  specifically  reject  these  arguments  on  the  basis  of
Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  itself  which  has  been  relied  upon  in Prakash  Singh
Badal v.  State of Punjab (cited supra). The argument regarding the addition of the
proviso  must  also  fall  as  the  language  of  the  suggested  proviso  contemplates  a
different  "post"  and  not  the  "office",  which  are  entirely  different  concepts.  That  is
apart  from  the  fact  that  the  interpretation  regarding  the  abuse  of  a  particular  office
and there being a direct relationship between a public servant and the office that he
has  abused,  has  already  been  approved  of  in  Antulay's  case  (cited  supra)  and  the
other cases following Antulay's case (cited supra) including Prakash Singh Badal v.
State of Punjab (cited supra). We, therefore, reject all these arguments.

2 9 . It  was  also  urged  that  a  literal  interpretation  is  a  must,  particularly,  to  Sub-
section (1) of Section 19. That argument also must fall as Sub-section (1) of Section
19  has  to  be  read  with  in  tune  with  and  in  light  of  Sub-sections  (a),  (b)  and  (c)
thereof.  We,  therefore,  reject  the  theory  of  litera  legis  while  interpreting  Section
19(1).  On  the  same  lines,  we  reject  the  argument  based  on  the  word  "is"  in  Sub-
sections (a), (b) and (c).  It is true that the  Section operates in praesenti; however,
the Section contemplates a person who continues to be a public servant on the date
of  taking  cognizance.  However,  as  per  the  interpretation,  it  excludes  a  person  who
has abused some other office than the one which he is holding on the date of taking
cognizance,  by  necessary  implication.  Once  that  is  clear,  the  necessity  of  the  literal
interpretation would not be there in the present case. Therefore, while we agree with
the  principles  laid  down  in Robert  Wigram  Crawford  v.  Richard  Spooner  4  MIA
179,  Re  Bedia  v.  Genreal  Accident,  Fir  and  Life  Assurance  Corporation  Ltd.
1948 (2) All ER 995 and Bourne (Inspector of Taxes)  v.  Norwich  Crematorium
Ltd.1967 (2) All ER 576, we specifically hold that giving the literal interpretation to
the Section would lead to absurdity and some unwanted results, as had already been
pointed out in Antulay's case (cited supra) (see the emphasis supplied to para 24 of
Antulay's judgment).

30. Another novel argument was advanced basing on the language of Sections 19(1)
and (2). It was pointed out that two different terms were used in the whole Section,
one  term  being  "public  servant"  and  the  other  being  "a  person".  It  was,  therefore,
urged that since the two different terms were used by the Legislature, they could not
connote the same meaning and they had to be read differently. The precise argument
was  that  the  term  "public  servant"  in  relation  to  the  commission  of  an  offence
connotes the time period of the past whereas the term "a person" in relation to the
sanction connotes the time period of the present.  Therefore, it was urged that since
the  two  terms  are  not  synonymous  and  convey  different  meanings  in  respect  of
time/status  of  the  office,  the  term  "public  servant"  should  mean  the  "past  office"
while  "person"  should  mean  the  "present  status/present  office".  While  we  do  agree
that  the  different  terms  used  in  one  provision  would  have  to  be  given  different
meaning,  we  do  not  accept  the  argument  that  by  accepting  the  interpretation  of
Section  19(1)  in  Antulay's  case,  the  two  terms  referred  to  above  get  the  same
meaning. We also do not see how this argument helps the present accused. The term
"public  servant"  is  used  in  Section  19(1)  as  Sections  7,  10,  1  and  13  which  are
essentially  the  offences  to  be  committed  by  public  servants  only.  Section  15  is  the
attempt  by  a  public  servant  to  commit  offence  referred  to  in  Section  13(1)(c)  or
13(1)(d).  Section  19(1)  speaks  about  the  cognizance  of  an  offence  committed  by  a
public  servant.  It  is  not  a  cognizance  of  the  public  servant.  The  Court  takes
cognizance  of  the  offence,  and  not  the  accused,  meaning,  the  Court  decides  to
consider  the  fact  of  somebody  having  committed  that  offence.  In  case  of  this  Act,

                                                                        

such  accused  is  only  a  public  servant.  Then  comes  the  next  stage  that  such
cognizance cannot be taken unless there is a previous sanction given. The sanction is
in respect of the accused who essentially is a public servant. The use of the term "a
person"  in  Sub-sections  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  only  denotes  an  "accused".  An  "accused"
means  who  is  employed  either  with  the  State  Government  or  with  the  Central
Government or in case of any other person, who is a public servant but not employed
with  either  the  State  Government  or  the  Central  Government.  It  is  only  "a  person"
who is employed or it is only "a person" who is prosecuted. His capacity as a "public
servant"  may  be  different  but  he  is  essentially  "a  person"  -  an  accused  person,
because  the  Section  operates  essentially  qua  an  accused  person.  It  is  not  a  "public
servant" who is employed; it is essentially "a person" and after being employed, he
becomes a "public servant" because of his position. It is, therefore, that the term "a
person" is used in Clauses (a), (b) and (c). The key words in these three clauses are
"not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of ....". It will be again
seen that the offences under Sections 7, 10, 11 and 13 are essentially committed by
those persons who are "public servants". Again, when it comes to the removal, it is
not  a  removal  of  his  role  as  a  "public  servant",  it  is  removal  of  "a  person"  himself
who  is  acting  as  a  "public  servant".  Once  the  Section  is  read  in  this  manner,  then
there  is  no  question  of  assigning  the  same  meaning  to  two  different  terms  in  the
Section. We reject this argument.

3 1 . Another  novel  argument  was  raised  on  the  basis  of  the  definition  of  "public
servant" as given in Section 2(c) of the Act. The argument is based more particularly
on  Clause  2(c)(vi)  which  provides  that  an  arbitrator,  on  account  of  his  position  as
such,  is  public  servant.  The  argument  is  that  some  persons,  as  contemplated  in
Sections  2(c)(vii),  (viii),  (ix)  and  (x),  may  adorn  the  character  of  a  public  servant
only  for  a  limited  time  and  if  after  renouncing  that  character  of  a  public  servant  on
account of lapse of time or non-continuation of their office they are to be tried for the
abuse on their part of the offices that they held, then it would be a very hazardous
situation. We do not think so. If the person concerned at the time when he is to be
tried  is  not  a  public  servant,  then  there  will  be  no  necessity  of  a  sanction  at  all.
Section  19(1)  is  very  clear  on  that  issue.  We  do  not  see  how  it  will  cause  any
hazardous situation. Similarly, it is tried to be argued that a Vice-Chancellor who is a
public  servant  and  is  given  a  temporary  assignment  of  checking  the  papers  or
conducting examination or being invigilator by virtue of which he is a public servant
in  an  entirely  different  capacity  as  from  that  of  a  Professor  or  a  Vice-Chancellor,
commits an offence in the temporary capacity, then he would not be entitled to the
protection  and  that  will  be  causing  violence  to  such  public  servant  and,  therefore,
such could not have been the intention of the Legislature. We feel that the example is
wholly irrelevant in the light of the clearest possible dictum in  Antulay's case (cited
supra)  and  in Prakash  Singh  Badal  v.  State  of  Punjab  (cited  supra).  If  the
concerned person continues to be a Vice-Chancellor and if he has abused his office as
Vice-Chancellor,  there  would  be  no  doubt  that  his  prosecution  would  require  a
sanction.  So,  it  will  be  a  question  of  examining  as  to  whether  such  person  has
abused  his  position  as  a  Vice-Chancellor  and  whether  he  continues  to  be  a  Vice-
Chancellor  on  the  date  of  taking  of  the  cognizance.  If,  however,  he  has  not  abused
his position as Vice-Chancellor but has committed some other offence which could be
covered by the Sub-sections of Section 19, then there would be no necessity of any
sanction.

32. Same argument was tried to be raised on the question of plurality of the offices
held by the public servant and the doubt arising as to who would be the sanctioning
authority in such case. In the earlier part of the judgment, we have already explained

                                                                           

the  concept  of  doubt  which  is  contemplated  in  the  Act,  more  particularly  in  Section
19(2).  The  law  is  very  clear  in  that  respect.  The  concept  of  'doubt'  or  'plurality  of
office' cannot be used to arrive at a conclusion that on that basis, the interpretation
of Section 19(1) would be different from that given in Antulay's case (cited supra) or
Prakash Singh Badal v. State of Punjab (cited supra). We have already explained
the  situation  that  merely  because  a  concept  of  doubt  is  contemplated  in  Section
19(2), it cannot mean that the public servant who has abused some other office than
the  one  he  is  holding  could  not  be  tried  without  a  sanction.  The  learned  senior
counsel tried to support their argument on the basis of the theory of "legal fiction".
We do not see as to how the theory of "legal fiction" can work in this case. It may be
that  the  Appellants  in  this  case  held  more  than  one  offices  during  the  check  period
which  they  are  alleged  to  have  abused;  however,  there  will  be  no  question  of  any
doubt  if  on  the  date  when  the  cognizance  is  taken,  they  are  not  continuing  to  hold
that  very  office.  The  relevant  time,  as  held  in S.A.  Venkataraman  v. State  (cited
supra), is the date on which the cognizance is taken. If on that date, the Appellant is
not a public servant, there will be no question of any sanction. If he continues to be a
public  servant  but  in  a  different  capacity  or  holding  a  different  office  than  the  one
which is alleged to have been abused, still there will be no question of sanction and
in  that  case,  there  will  also  be  no  question  of  any  doubt  arising  because  the  doubt
can  arise  only  when  the  sanction  is  necessary.  In  case  of  the  present  Appellants,
there  was  no  question  of  there  being  any  doubt  because  basically  there  was  no
question of the Appellants' getting any protection by a sanction.

33. We do not, therefore, agree with learned  Senior  Counsel  Shri  Mukul  Rohtagi as
well as Shri U.U. Lalit arguing for the Appellants, that the decision in Antulay's case
(cited  supra)  and  the  subsequent  decisions  require  any  reconsideration  for  the
reasons argued before us. Even on merits, there is no necessity of reconsidering the
relevant ratio laid down in Antulay's case (cited supra).

34. Thus, we are of the clear view that the High Court was absolutely right in relying
on the decision in Prakash Singh Badal  v.  State of Punjab (cited supra) to hold
that the Appellants in both the appeals had abused entirely different office or offices
than  the  one  which  they  were  holding  on  the  date  on  which  cognizance  was  taken
and, therefore, there was no necessity of sanction under Section 19 of the Act as held
i n K.  Karunakaran  v.  State  of  Kerala  (cited  supra)  and  the  later  decision  in
Prakash  Singh  Badal  v.  State  of  Punjab  (cited  supra).  The  appeals  are  without
any merit and are dismissed.



                                                                       

