
PETITIONER:
Bankat and Anr.

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra



JUDGMENT:

J U D G M E N T (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) Nos. 3538-39/2004) ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

Leave granted.

Appellants call in question legality of the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of the
Bombay High Court, Aurangabad Bench. The appellants who are described as A-1 and A-2
(hereinafter referred to as the 'accused') had questioned correctness of their conviction as recorded
by the learned Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, Osmanabad for offences punishable under Sections 325
and 326 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the 'IPC').

For offence relatable to Section 326 read with Section 34 IPC each of A-1 to A-3 was sentenced by
the learned trial Judge to undergo imprisonment for one year and pay a fine of Rs.500/- with
default stipulation. But looking to the age of A-4, he was sentenced to imprisonment for one month
and pay a fine of Rs.500/- with default stipulation. No separate sentence was passed for the offence
punishable under Section 325 read with Section 34 IPC.

By the impugned judgment, the High Court held that A-3 was not responsible for the injury on the
leg of victim Ratnabai (PW-2) and on the head of the victim Manik (PW-1) and taking note of the
long passage of time the custodial sentence was reduced to the period already undergone. However,
the fine was enhanced to Rs.2,000/- For Pandurang Mohan Aade (A-4) also, looking to his age fine
was enhanced to Rs.2,000/- but custodial sentence was reduced to period already undergone. So far
as the present appellants are concerned it was held that there is no scope for interference with the
sentence awarded. In other words, the conviction was maintained for all the four accused persons
but different sentences were imposed.

The benefit of Bombay Probation of Offenders Act (in short the 'Probation Act') was not extended to
the appellants looking into the nature of the offence committed.



1


After disposal of the revision application on 11.12.2003, an application was filed stating that the
matter has been compromised between the victims and the accused persons and, therefore, the
order should be modified. The said application was rejected by the learned Single Judge holding that
there is no scope for modification of the order after disposal of the revision application.

Though in support of the appeals, many points were urged on the factual aspects, we find that the
Courts below have concurrently found that the accused persons were responsible for injuries on the
victims Ratnabai and Manik and, therefore, in view of the evidence of the eye- witnesses, more
particularly, the injured witnesses there is no scope for interference with the conclusions arrived at.

It was next submitted by learned counsel for the appellants that occurrence took place on 1.3.1993
and more than a decade has elapsed and in the meantime the parties have sorted out their
differences, entered into compromise and, therefore, the High Court should have accepted the
prayer for modification of the order.

It was further submitted that though the offence under Section 326 is not compoundable in terms of
Section 320 (9) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Code') this Court can exercise
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short the 'Constitution') and pass
necessary orders. It was submitted that the benefit extended to the other co-accused persons should
be made available to the appellants and the custodial sentence should have been reduced to the
period already undergone.

It is vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that as the dispute was
amicably settled and the matter was compromised, the High Court ought to have granted
permission to compound the offences and ought not to have convicted the appellants and imposed
the sentence. For this purpose, reliance is placed upon the decisions of this Court in Ram Pujan v.
State of U.P (1973 (2) SCC 456) and Mahesh Chand v. State Rajasthan (1990 Supp SCC 681). As
against this, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the offence under Section 326 IPC is
not compoundable and the High Court has rightly rejected the application for compounding the
same. He, for this purpose, relied upon the judgment of this Court in Ram Lal v. State of J&K (1999
(2) SCC 213) wherein after referring to Section 320 (9) of the Code the Court observed that the
decision in Mahesh Chand's case (supra) was rendered per incuriam.

In our view, the submission of the learned counsel for the respondent requires to be accepted. For
compounding of the offences punishable under the IPC, a complete scheme is provided under
Section 320 of the Code. Sub-section (1) of Section 320 provides that the offences mentioned in the
Table provided thereunder can be compounded by the persons mentioned in column 3 of the said
Table. Further, sub- section (2) provides that the offences mentioned in the Table could be
compounded by the victim with the permission of the court. As against this, sub-section (9)
specifically provides that "no offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section". In
view of the aforesaid legislative mandate, only the offences which are covered by Table 1 or Table 2
as stated above can be compounded and the rest of the offences punishable under the IPC could not
be compounded. Further, the decision in Ram Pujan's case (supra) does not advance the contention
raised by the appellants. In the said case, the Court held that the major offences for which the



2


accused have been convicted were no doubt non-compoundable, but the fact of compromise can be
taken into account in determining the quantum of sentence. In Ram Lal's case (supra) the Court
referred to the decision of this Court in Y. Suresh Babu v. State of A.P.(JT (1987) 2 SC 361) and to
the following observations made by the Supreme Court in Mahesh Chand's case (supra) and held as
under : (SCC p. 682, para 3) "3. We gave our anxious consideration to the case and also the plea put
forward for seeking permission to compound the offence. After examining the nature of the case and
the circumstances under which the offence was committed, it may be proper that the trial court shall
permit them to compound the offence."

In the case of Y. Suresh Babu's (supra) the Court has specifically observed that the said case "shall
not be treated as a precedent". The aforesaid two decisions are based on facts and in any set of
circumstances, they can be treated as per incuriam as pointed attention of the Court to sub-section
(9) of Section 320 was not drawn. Hence, the High Court rightly refused to grant permission to
compound the offence punishable under Section 326.

We reiterate that the course adopted in Ram Pujan's case (supra) and Mahesh Chand's case (supra)
was not in accordance with law. The above position was elaborately indicated by a three-Judge
Bench of this Court in Surendra Nath Mohanty and Anr. vs. State of Orissa (1999 (5) SCC 238).

However, considering the fact that the parties have settled their dispute outside the court, the fact
that 10 years have elapsed from the date of the incident, and the further fact that the appellants have
already undergone several months' imprisonment, ends of justice would be met if the sentence of
imprisonment is reduced to the period already undergone besides imposing a fine of Rs.5000/- on
each of the accused under Section 326 read with Section 34 IPC. In default of payment of fine, the
appellants concerned shall undergo imprisonment for a further period of six months. We also
refrain from imposing any separate sentence on the other counts of offences. Out of the fine amount,
if realised, a sum of Rs. 4000/- also be paid to each of the injured as compensation.

The appeals stand disposed of accordingly.



3

