
Appellants: Elavarasan

Vs.

Respondent: State rep. by Inspector of Police



 




JUDGMENT

1 . This  appeal  by  special  leave  arises  out  of  a  judgment  and  order  passed  by  the
High Court of Madras whereby Criminal Appeal No. 1215 of 2003 has been dismissed
and  the  conviction  of  the  Appellant  and  sentence  awarded  to  him  for  offences
punishable under Sections 302, 307 and 342 of the I.P.C. upheld.

2 . Briefly  stated  the  prosecution  case  is  that  the  Appellant  was  residing  in  a  house
situate  at  Yadwal  Street,  Poovam  Koticherri,  Distt.  Karaikal,  Tamil  Nadu.  Apart  from
his wife Smt. Dhanalakshmi, PW2 and his daughter Abirami, aged about 1 1/2 years,
his mother Smt. Valli, PW3 also lived with him. On the fateful night intervening 11-12
of December, 2000 at about 1 p.m. the Appellant is alleged to have started a quarrel
with  his  wife  accusing  her  of  having  brought  misfortune  to  him  ever  since  she  got
married  to  him.  The  immediate  provocation  for  making  that  accusation  was  his
inability to sell the property owned by his mother, as the Revenue entries relating the
same  stood  in  the  name  of  Kannan,  the  paternal  uncle  of  the  Appellant,  who  it
appears  was  not  agreeable  to  the  sale  of  the  property.  The  quarrel  between  the
husband  and  the  wife  took  an  ugly  turn  when  the  Appellant  made  a  murderous
assault on his wife, Dhanalakshmi causing several injuries to her including those on
her head, left hand, right cheek and other parts of the body. Intervention of PW3, Vali
who  is  none  other  than  the  mother  of  the  Appellant  also  did  not  stop  the  Appellant
from assaulting his wife. In the process injuries were caused even to the mother. Due
to the ruckus caused by the quarrel and the assault on the two women, Abirami who
was sleeping in the adjacent room woke up and started crying. The Appellant at that
stage is alleged to have gone inside the room and hit the deceased resulting in her
death.

3. The prosecution case further is that the Appellant did not allow the injured to go

                                                                     

out  of  the  house  and  bolted  the  doors  from  inside.  In  the  morning  at  about  7  a.m.
Shri  R.  Parvathi,  PW5  is  said  to  have  gone  to  the  house  of  R.  Natarajan,  PW1  -  a
resident of the same street in the village and told him about the quarrel at the house
of the Appellant the previous night. Both of them then came to the spot and found a
pool of blood near the outer door of the house of the Appellant. Since the door was
bolted from inside, PW1 called the Appellant by his name, who responded to the call
and said that he had cut his mother and wife and wanted to commit suicide for which
he demanded some poison from them.  A large number of villagers in the meantime
gathered  on  the  spot  but  the  Appellant  refused  to  open  the  door.  The  Police  was
informed about the incident on telephone and soon arrived at the spot to knock at the
doors of the Appellant's house asking him to open the same. The Appellant refused to
do so and threatened that he would murder anyone who ventured to enter the house.
Since the Appellant remained adamant in this resolve, the Police with the help of PWs
1, 8 and others forced the door open and found the Appellant inside the house armed
with  an  Aruval,  and  his  mother  and  wife  lying  inside  the  house  with  serious  cut
injuries and blood all over the place. In the adjacent room they found Abirami in an
injured  condition.  Not  knowing  whether  she  was  dead  or  alive,  she  was  picked  up
and  rushed  to  the  hospital  alongwith  the  other  two  injured,  where  the  doctor
pronounced  the  child  brought  dead.  On  completion  of  the  investigation,  the  police
filed a chargesheet against the Appellant for offences punishable under Sections 342,
307 (2 counts) and 302 IPC. He was committed to the sessions at Karaikal where the
Appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed a trial.

4 . Before  the  Trial  Court  the  prosecution  examined  as  many  as  21  witnesses  in
support of its case while the accused-Appellant who set up unsoundness of mind in
defence did not lead any evidence except making a request for medical examination
which  request  was  allowed  and  Dr.  R.  Chandrasekaran  and  Dr.  P.  Srinivasan  who
examined  the  Appellant  summoned  as  court  witnesses  to  depose  about  their
observations and conclusions as regards the mental health of the Appellant.

5 . The  Trial  court  eventually  rejected  the  plea  of  insanity  and  found  the  Appellant
guilty of the charges framed against him and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment
for  life  for  the  murder  of  his  child  baby  Abirami  and  to  undergo  1  year  rigorous
imprisonment for the offence punishable under Section 342 IPC and 10 years rigorous
imprisonment together with a fine of Rs. 1,000/-for each of the offences punishable
under Section 307 (2 counts). The sentences were ordered to run concurrently.

6 . Aggrieved  by  the  judgment  and  order  of  the  Trial  Court  the  Appellant  filed  an
appeal  before  the  High  Court  of  Madras,  who  dismissed  the  same  and  affirmed  the
findings  recorded  by  the  Trial  Court  as  already  noticed  by  us.  The  High  Court  held
that the Appellant had been caught red handed with the weapon of offence inside the
house in the presence of PWs 1, 7, 8 and others. Besides, there was no reason why
his  wife  PW2,  who  was  an  injured  eye-witness  to  the  entire  incident,  should  have
falsely  implicated  the  Appellant.  The  High  Court  also  took  the  view  that  since  PW3,
the  mother  of  the  Appellant  who  had  also  been  injured  in  the  incident  had  turned
hostile and stated that she had sustained the injuries accidentally because of a fall,
the  Appellant's  conviction  for  the  attempted  murder  of  his  mother  punishable  under
Section 307 was liable to be set aside. The fact that PW3 had turned hostile did not,
opined the High Court, make any dent in the prosecution case in so far as the same
related to the murder of the innocent child and an attempt made by the Appellant on
the life of his wife Dhanalakshmi. The plea of insanity was rejected by the High Court
on  the  ground  that  there  was  no  material  to  show  that  the  Appellant  was  insane  at
the  time  of  the  commission  of  the  offences.  The  present  appeal  assails  the

                                                                        

correctness of the above judgment and order as already noticed by us.

7 . Appearing  for  the  Appellant,  Mr.  Mani,  learned  Counsel  urged  a  solitary  point  in
support  of  the  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the  material  on  record  sufficiently  proved
the  plea  of  insanity  set  up  by  the  Appellant  at  the  trial.  Reliance  in  support  was
placed  by  the  learned  Counsel  upon  the  deposition  of  Dr.  P.  Srinivasan,  CW1,
according  to  whom  the  Appellant  was  a  person  of  unsound  mind.  He  also  drew  our
attention  to  the  deposition  of  other  witnesses  to  argue  that  the  Appellant  had  been
treated  by  a  Psychiatrist  and  had  been  taking  medicines  for  his  illness.  Reliance  in
particular  was  placed  by  the  learned  Counsel  upon  the  contents  of  Ex.P.3  the
observation  Mahazar  which  refers  to  certain  writings  on  the  walls  of  the  Appellant's
house  suggesting  that  the  Appellant  was  mentally  unsound  even  at  the  time  of
commission of crime. From the graffiti, it was according to Mr. Mani evident that the
Appellant  suffered  from  insanity  before  and  at  the  time  of  the  incident.  Mr.  Mani
further argued that murderous assault on his wife, his mother and child without any
ostensible reason was itself suggestive of the Appellant being an insane person. The
Appellant's conduct after the event was also, argued Mr. Mani, suggestive of his being
of  unsound  mind,  which  aspects  the  courts  below  had  failed  to  appreciate  in  the
process denying to the Appellant the benefit of Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code,
legitimately due to him.

8. On behalf of the Respondent Mr. Venkataramani, learned senior counsel contended
that the trial court as also the High Court had correctly found the plea of insanity set
up by the Appellant as not proved and held the Appellant guilty of the offences with
which  he  stood  charged.  Mr.  Ventakaramani  argued  that  there  was  no  credible
evidence to establish legal insanity at the time of the commission of the offence so as
to entitle the Appellant to the benefit of Section 84 of IPC. The fact that the Appellant
did not run away from the place of occurrence or that he had attacked his wife and
child without any reason did not establish that the  Appellant was of unsound mind,
hence  unable  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  act  or  that  what  he  was  doing  was
either wrong or contrary to law.  Reliance was placed by  Mr.  Venkatarmani upon the
deposition  of  CW2  Dr.  R.  Chandrasekaran  in  support  of  his  submission  that  the
Appellant was not an insane person at the time of the incident or at the time he was
tried for the offences committed by him.

9. There was before the courts below and even before us no challenge to the factual
narrative given by the prosecution and the witnesses examined on its behalf. That the
Appellant lived with his mother, wife and minor child in the house owned by him was
not disputed. That he assaulted his wife, who was in family way and caused several
injuries  to  her  and  to  his  mother  who  intervened  to  save  the  former  is  also  not  in
dispute. That injuries were caused even to Abirami who succumbed to the same was
also  not  challenged  before  us  by  Mr.  Mani.  The  Appellant's  mother  PW3,  no  doubt
turned hostile at the trial and tried to attribute the injuries sustained by her to a fall
in  the  house,  but  the  deposition  of  PW2,  the  wife  of  the  Appellant  completely
supported  the  prosecution  case  and  the  sequence  of  events  leading  to  the  heartless
killing  of  the  innocent  child  Abirami,  who  was  sleeping  in  the  adjacent  room  and
whose only fault was that she woke up hearing the shrieks and wails of the mother
and  started  crying.  That  the  Appellant  was  arrested  from  the  house  from  where  the
injured witnesses  PW2 and  PW3 and  Abirami were removed in an injured condition,
was  also  not  disputed.  Even  independent  of  the  line  of  arguments  adopted  by  the
learned Counsel, we are satisfied that there is no reason whatsoever to disbelieve the
deposition  of  Dhanalakshmi,  PW2  who  unlike  Abirami  not  only  suffered  the
murderous assault but survived to tell the tale in all its details that leave no room for

                                                                      

any  doubt  in  our  mind  about  her  version  being  completely  reliable.  That  Shri  R.
Natarajan, PW1 and Shri J. Ashokan, PW8 also support and corroborate the version of
PW2,  Dhanalakshmi,  only  goes  to  show  that  it  was  the  Appellant  and  the  Appellant
alone who attacked not only his wife but his daughter of tender age resulting in the
death  of  the  later.  Superadded  to  the  above  is  the  depositions  of  PW19,  Dr.
Ramamurthy, who conducted the post-mortem of the dead body of Abirami and who
proved the post-mortem report marked as Ex.P.25 enumerating the injuries found on
the body of the unfortunate child. The doctor opined that death was due to coma as a
result of head injuries within 24 to 36 hours prior to post-mortem and that the blunt
side of a weapon like M.O.27 could have caused the injuries found on the dead body.

1 0 . Similarly,  the  deposition  of  PW16,  Dr.  Anni  Pula  Juilet  who  was  posted  as
Assistant  Surgeon  in  the  Government  Hospital  at  Karaikal  proved  the  injury  report
marked Ex.P19 that listed the injuries sustained by Dhanalakshmi, PW2, as under:

(1) Injury of 3 cms. x 3 cms. Right side of leg.

(2) Injury of 3 cms. x 3 cms. Lt. side of elbow.

(3) Injury on left side of forearm of 7 cms. x 7 cm. Suspected fracture on it.
Forearm.

(4) Injury Lt. side of hand 3 cms. x 3 cms.

(5) Injury Lt. Side of hand 3 cms. x 3 cms.

(6) Injury on the palm.

(7) Injury all the fingers.

(8) Injury chest 4 cms. x 4 cms.

(9) 24 weeks foetus.

(10) Injury face angle from Lt. Side measuring 7 cms. x 7 cms.

(11) Injury scale back side of 8 cms. x 8 cms.

(12) Deep cut on the scale 10 cms. x 12 cms. Deep cut extending to the back
3 cms. x 3 cms.

(13) Abrasion frontal side of scalp.

(14) Injury Rt. Side of the hand. Lacerated injury Rt. Index finger extending
bone.

(15) Deep cut injury on the scalp 6 cms. x 6 cms.

11. Injuries found on the person of PW3, the mother of the Appellant were described
in Ex.P20 proved by the same witness, as under:

(1) Cut injury Lt. Side of forearm hand.

(2) Cut injury Rt. Side of hand near the Wrist 7 cms. x 6 cms.

(3)  Deep  cut  injury  on  the  forehead  5  cms.  x  5  cms.  Lt.  Side  above  ridge

 ( 4 of 11)                                                                             

bone.

(4) Deep cut injury Lt. Side of forearm 7 cms. x 7 cmx. near wrist.

(5) Deep cut injury on the Lt. Side of forearm 5 cms. x 5 cms.

(6) Deep cut injury on the scalp exposing the bones about 16 cms. x 16 cms.

1 2 . PW15,  Dr.  Shriramulu,  was  the  Assistant  Surgeon  in  the  General  Hospital  at
Karaikal  who  found  15  injuries  on  the  person  of  PW2,  stated  that  PW2  remained
admitted to the hospital from 12th December, 2000 till 28 th January, 2001. According
to  him  the  Appellant's  mother  PW3  had  also  suffered  six  injuries  and  her  little  and
index fingers in the right hand had been amputated in the course of treatment on 8th
January, 2001.

13. In  the  light  of  the  above  evidence  and  in  the  absence  of  any  challenge  to  the
veracity of the witnesses produced by the prosecution we have no manner of doubt in
our  mind  that  the  Appellant  alone  was  responsible  for  the  assault  on  his  wife  PW2,
Dhanlakshmi and baby  Abrami who lost her life as a result of the injuries sustained
by her in the said incident.  Left at that there can be no escape from the conclusion
that  the  Appellant  was  guilty  of  committing  culpable  homicide  of  his  daughter
Abirami  aged  about  1  1/2  year  and  an  attempt  to  commit  the  murder  of  his  wife
Dhanlakshmi, even if the assault on the mother of the Appellant is taken as doubtful
on  account  of  the  injured  turning  hostile  at  the  trial  and  attempting  to  attribute  the
injuries sustained by her to a fall.

14. The  question,  however,  is  whether  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  the  benefit  of
Section 84 of  Indian  Penal  Code which provides that nothing is an offence which is
done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is
incapable of knowing the nature of the act or who is incapable of knowing that what
he is doing, is either wrong or contrary to law.  Before adverting to the evidence on
record  as  regards  the  plea  of  insanity  set  up  by  the  Appellant,  we  consider  it
necessary  to  refer  to  two  aspects  that  bear  relevance  to  cases  where  a  plea  of
insanity is raised in defence by a person accused of a crime. The first aspect concerns
the burden of proving the existence of circumstances that would bring the case within
the  purview  of  Section  84  of  the  I.P.C.  It  is  trite  that  the  burden  of  proving  the
commission  of  an  offence  is  always  on  the  prosecution  and  that  the  same  never
shifts.  Equally  well  settled  is  the  proposition  that  if  intention  is  an  essential
ingredient of the offence alleged against the accused the prosecution must establish
that  ingredient  also.  There  is  no  gainsaying  that  intention  or  the  state  of  mind  of  a
person is ordinarily inferred from the circumstances of the case. This implies that, if a
person  deliberately  assaults  another  and  causes  an  injury  to  him  then  depending
upon  the  weapon  used  and  the  part  of  the  body  on  which  it  is  struck,  it  would  be
reasonable to assume that the accused had the intention to cause the kind of injury
which  he  inflicted.  Having  said  that,  Section  84  can  be  invoked  by  the  accused  for
nullifying  the  effect  of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the  prosecution.  He  can  do  so  by
proving  that  he  was  incapable  of  knowing  the  nature  of  the  act  or  of  knowing  that
what he was doing was either wrong or contrary to law. But what is important is that
the  burden  of  bringing  his/her  case  under  Section  84  of  the  IPC  lies  squarely  upon
the person claiming the benefit of that provision. Section 105 of the Evidence Act is
in this regard relevant and may be extracted:

105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.-When

                                                                          

a  person  is  accused  of  any  offence,  the  burden  of  proving  the  existence  of
circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the
Indian  Penal  Code,  (45  of  1860)  or  within  any  special  exception  or  proviso
contained  in  any  other  part  of  the  same  Code,  or  in  any  law  defining  the
offence,  is  upon  him,  and  the  Court  shall  presume  the  absence  of  such
circumstances.

15. A careful reading of the above would show that not only is the burden to prove
an  exception  cast  upon  the  accused  but  the  Court  shall  presume  the  absence  of
circumstances which may bring his case within any of the general exceptions in the
Indian Penal Code or within any special exception or provision contained in any part
of  the  said  Code  or  in  law  defining  the  offence.  The  following  passage  from  the
decision  of  this  Court  in Dahyabhai  Chhaganbhai  Thakkar  v.  State  of  Gujarat
MANU/SC/0068/1964  :  (1964)  7  SCR  361  may  serve  as  a  timely  reminder  of  the
principles governing burden of proof in cases where the accused pleads an exception:

The doctrine of burden of proof in the context of the plea of insanity may be
stated in the following propositions:

(1)  The  prosecution  must  prove  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that  the
accused had committed the offence with the requisite mens rea, and
the burden of proving that always rests on the prosecution from the
beginning  to  the  end  of  the  trial.  (2)  There  is  a  rebuttable
presumption  that  the  accused  was  not  insane,  when  he  committed
the crime, in the sense laid down by Section 84 of the Indian Penal
Code:  the  accused  may  rebut  it  by  placing  before  the  court  all  the
relevant  evidence  oral,  documentary  or  circumstantial,  but  the
burden of proof upon him is no higher than that rests upon a party
to  civil  proceedings.  (3)  Even  if  the  accused  was  not  able  to
establish  conclusively  that  he  was  insane  at  the  time  he  committed
the offence, the evidence placed before the court by the accused or
by the prosecution may raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of the
court  as  regards  one  or  more  of  the  ingredients  of  the  offence,
including mens rea of the accused and in that case the court would
be  entitled  to  acquit  the  accused  on  the  ground  that  the  general
burden of proof resting on the prosecution was not discharged.

16. The second aspect which we need to mention is that the standard of proof which
the  accused  has  to  satisfy  for  the  discharge  of  the  burden  cast  upon  him  under
Section 105 (supra) is not the same as is expected of the prosecution. A long line of
decisions  of  this  Court  have  authoritatively  settled  the  legal  proposition  on  the
subject. Reference in this connection to the decision of this Court in State of U.P. v.
Ram  Swarup  and  Anr.  MANU/SC/0218/1974  :  (1974)  4  SCC  764  should  suffice
where this Court observed:

The burden which rests on the accused to prove the exception is not of the
same rigour as the burden of the prosecution to prove the charge beyond a
reasonable  doubt.  It  is  enough  for  the  accused  to  show,  as  in  a  civil  case,
that the preponderance of probabilities is in his favour.

17. To  the  same  effect  is  the  decision  of  this  Court  in Bhikari  v.  State  of  Uttar
Pradesh MANU/SC/0073/1965 : AIR 1966 SC 1.

18. Let us now consider the material on record in the light of the above propositions

                                                                           

to  determine  whether  the  Appellant  had  discharged  the  burden  of  bringing  his  case
under Section 84 of the IPC. The Appellant has led no evidence in defence to support
the  plea  of  legal  insanity.  That  may  be  a  significant  aspect  but  by  no  means
conclusive, for it is open to an accused to rely upon the material brought on record
by the prosecution to claim the benefit of the exception. Evidence in defence may be
a surplusage in cases where the defence can make out a case for the acquittal of the
accused based on the evidence adduced by the prosecution.

19. What  falls  for  consideration  in  the  light  of  the  above  is  whether  the  present  is
one  such  case  where  the  plea  of  insanity  -  is  proved  or  even  probablised  by  the
evidence  led  by  the  prosecution  and  the  court  witnesses  examined  at  the  Trial.
Depositions  of  two  prosecution  witnesses  viz.  PW2,  Dhanalakshmi  and  PW3,  Valli
immediately  assume  significance  to  which  we  may  at  this  stage  refer.  PW2,
Dhanalakshmi  has,  apart  from  narrating  the  sequence  of  events  leading  to  the
incident, stated that her husband is a government servant getting a monthly salary of
Rs. 4000/-which he would hand over to the witness to meet the household expenses.
She further stated that the couple had a peaceful married life for five years but there
was  a  dispute  between  the  Appellant  and  his  maternal  uncle  by  name  Kannan  in
regard  to  the  property  a  part  of  which  the  Appellant  had  already  sold  and  the
remainder he wanted to sell. The Appellant had according to the witness started the
quarrel  around  12  p.m.  but  assaulted  her  an  hour  later.  The  witness  further  stated
that  for  sleeplessness,  the  Appellant  used  to  take  some  medicine  but  she  did  not
recall  the  name  of  the  Clinic  from  where  he  was  taking  the  treatment.  According  to
the  witness,  the  Psychiatrist  who  was  treating  the  Appellant  had  diagnosed  his
medical  condition  to  be  the  effect  of  excessive  drinking  and  advised  that  if  the
Appellant took the medicines regularly he would get cured.

20. That brings us to the deposition of PW3, Smt. Valli, the mother of the Appellant.
This  witness  has  in  cross-examination  stated  that  the  Appellant  was  working  as  a
Watchman at PWD bungalow and that she used to deliver his lunch at the Appellant's
office. She also referred to the dispute between the Appellant and his paternal uncle
regarding family properties in which connection he had filed a complaint to the police
station. On the date of the incident, the family had their dinner at around 9 p.m. and
gone to bed. But the couple started quarreling around 1 p.m. leading to an assault on
PW2, Dhanalakshmi. The witness stated that the Appellant was undergoing treatment
with a Psychiatrist in a clinic situated at Perumal Kovi street and that the doctor had
diagnosed the  Appellant to be a case of mental disorder because of which he could
get angry very often.

21. From  the  deposition  of  the  above  two  witnesses  who  happen  to  be  the  close
family members of the Appellant it is not possible to infer that the Appellant was of
unsound mind at the time of the incident or at any time before that. The fact that the
Appellant was working as a government servant and was posted as a Watchman with
no  history  of  any  complaint  as  to  his  mental  health  from  anyone  supervising  his
duties, is significant. Equally important is the fact that his spouse Smt. Dhanalakshim
who  was  living  with  him  under  the  same  roof  also  did  not  suggest  any  ailment
afflicting the Appellant except sleeplessness which was diagnosed by the doctor to be
the effect of excessive drinking. The deposition of PW3, Valli that her son was getting
treatment for mental disorder is also much too vague and deficient for this Court to
record  a  finding  of  unsoundness  of  mind  especially  when  the  witness  had  turned
hostile  at  the  trial  despite  multiple  injuries  sustained  by  her  which  she  tried  to
attribute  to  a  fall  inside  her  house.  The  statement  of  the  witness  that  her  son  was
getting treatment for some mental disorder cannot in the circumstances be accepted


on its face value, to rest an order of acquittal in favour of the Appellant on the basis
thereof.  It  is  obvious  that  the  mother  has  switched  sides  to  save  her  son  from  the
consequences flowing from his criminal act.

22. That  leaves  us  with  the  deposition  of  two  medical  experts  who  examined  the
Appellant  under  the  orders  of  the  Court  during  the  course  of  the  trial.  Dr.  B.
Srinivasan,  Specialist  in  Psychiatry,  in  his  deposition  stated  that  the  Appellant  was
admitted  to  the  government  hospital,  Karaikal  on  29th  July,  2002  pursuant  to  an
order  passed  by  the  Trial  Court  directing  his  medical  examination  so  as  to  evaluate
his  mental  condition  and  ability  to  converse.  The  witness  further  stated  that  the
Appellant was kept under observation on and from the afternoon of 29th July 2000 till
6th August, 2002 during which time he found him to be conscious, ambulant dressed
adequately  and  able  to  converse  with  the  examiner.  The  doctor  has  described  the
condition of the Appellant during this period in the following words:

He  has  restlessness,  suspicious  looking  around  at  time  inappropriate  smile
has  complaints  of  some  inner  voice  telling  to  him  (abusive  in  nature  at
times), has fear and worries about others opinion about him, wants to be left
alone, says he needs a few pegs of alcohol to sleep peacefully at night.  He
has  confusion  at  times  about  the  whisper  within  him,  feels  some  pulling
connection between his chest and brain, that prevents him from taking freely
with  people  and  with  the  examiner.  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  above
individual  is  of  unsound  mind.  The  possible  medical  dispenses  being
psychosis: (The differential diagnosis considered in this case are

1. Paranoid Psychosis (Schizophrenia)

2. Substance induced Psychosis (Alcohol induced)

3. Organic Psychosis/organic mental disorder

(Head injury sequelae & personality changes)

I,  therefore,  request  this  Hon'ble  Court  be  kindly  arrange  for  a  second
opinion by another consultant Psychiatrist in this case and also Psychological
assessment by a clinical psychologist.

(Emphasis supplied)

2 3 . The  Appellant  was,  in  the  light  of  the  recommendations  made  by  Dr.  B.
Srinivasan referred to JIPMAR hospital at Pondicherry, where he remained under the
observation of Dr. R. Chandrashekhar, CW2 who happened to be Professor and Head
of  the  Department  of  Psychiatry  in  that  Hospital.  In  his  deposition  before  the  Court
Dr.  Chandrashekhar  has  stated  that  the  Appellant  was  admitted  on  30th  September,
2002  but  escaped  from  the  hospital  on  1st  October,  2002  in  which  connection  the
doctor made a report marked Ex.P1. After examining the relevant record the witness
deposed  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  any  Psychataxia  symptoms.  In  the  detailed
report proved by the witness and marked Ex.P2 the medical condition of the Appellant
is described as under:

He  was  well  groomed.  Rapport  was  established.  No  abnormal  motoric
behavior was present. He was cooperative. His mood appeared euthymic and
speech  was  normal.  There  was  no  evidence  of  formal  thought  disorder  or

                                                                             

disorder  of  possession  or  thought  content.  No  perceptual  disorder  was
evident.  Attention  was  arousable  and  concentration  well  sustained.  He  was
oriented  to  time,  place,  person.  The  immediate  recall,  recent  and  remote
memory  was  intact.  Abstraction  was  at  functional  level.  Judgment  was
preserved. Insight was present.

2 4 . In  the  final  report  the  doctor  has  drawn  the  following  pen  picture  about  the
Appellant's mental health and psycho diagnostic evaluation.

PSYCHO-DIAGOSTIC EVALUATION:

Patient's  perception,  memory  and 
impaired
(Memory  Quotient  was  70  and  performance  quotient  was  72).  Mixed
psychotic picture with predominantly affective disturbances was seen.

intelligence  were  slightly 

He requires further support and guidance in occupational area.

The  examination  is  suggestive  of  a  life  time  diagnosis  of  Psychosis  (not
otherwise  specified)  and  currently  in  remission.  Patient  was  on  treatment
with  vitamins  and  chlorpromazine  100  mg.  per  day  during  his  stay  in  the
ward.  The  course  in  the  hospital  was  uneventful  except  for  the  fact  that  he
absconded from the ward on 1.10.2002.  I am of the opinion that the above
individual  does  not  currently  suffer  from  any  mental  symptom,  which  can
interfere with the capability of making his defense.

Sd/- 
XXX
(DR. R. CHANDRASHKARAN)
H/D of Psychiatry
JIPMER, Pondicherry-6.

Dt. 5th October, 2002.

25. What is important is that the depositions of the two doctors examined as court
witnesses  during  the  trial  deal  with  the  mental  health  condition  of  the  Appellant  at
the  time  of  the  examination  by  the  doctors  and  not  the  commission  of  the  offence
which is the relevant point of time for claiming the benefit of  Section 84  I.P.C.  The
medical  opinion  available  on  record  simply  deals  with  the  question  whether  the
Appellant is suffering from any disease, mental or otherwise that could prevent him
from  making  his  defence  at  the  trial.  It  is  true  that  while  determining  whether  the
accused  is  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  Section  84  I.P.C.  the  Court  has  to  consider  the
circumstances  that  proceeded,  attended  or  followed  the  crime  but  it  is  equally  true
that such circumstances must be established by credible evidence. No such evidence
has been led in this case. On the contrary expert evidence comprising the deposition
and  certificates  of  Dr.  Chandrashekhar  of  JIPMER  unequivocally  establish  that  the
Appellant  did  not  suffer  from  any  medical  symptoms  that  could  interfere  with  his
capability  of  making  his  defence.  There  is  no  evidence  suggesting  any  mental
derangement of the Appellant at the time of the commission of the crime for neither
the wife nor even his mother have in so many words suggested any unsoundness of
mind  leave  alone  a  mental  debility  that  would  prevent  him  from  understanding  the
nature  and  consequences  of  his  actions.  The  doctor,  who  is  alleged  to  have  treated
him for insomnia, has also not been examined nor has anyone familiar with the state
of  his  mental  health  stepped  into  the  witness  box  to  support  the  plea  of  insanity.
There  is  no  gainsaying  that  insanity  is  a  medical  condition  that  cannot  for  long  be
concealed  from  friends  and  relatives  of  the  person  concerned.  Non-production  of

                                                                            

anyone who noticed any irrational or eccentric behaviour on the part of the Appellant
in  that  view  is  noteworthy.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  plea  of  insanity  taken  by  the
Appellant was neither substantiated nor probablised.

2 6 . Mr.  Mani,  as  a  last  ditch  attempt  relied  upon  certain  observations  made  in
Mahazar Ex.P3 in support of the argument that the Appellant was indeed insane at the
time of commission of the offences. He submitted that the Mahazar referred to certain
writings  on  the  inner  walls  of  the  Appellant's  house  which  suggested  that  the
Appellant was insane. A similar argument was advanced even before the Courts below
and  was  rejected  for  reasons  which  we  find  to  be  fairly  sound  and  acceptable
especially  when  evidence  on  record  establishes  that  the  Appellant  was  an  alcoholic,
who could scribble any message or request on the walls of his house while under the
influence  of  alcohol.  The  Courts  below  were,  therefore,  justified  in  holding  that  the
plea of insanity had not been proved and the burden of proof cast upon the Appellant
under  Section  105  of  the  Evidence  Act  remained  undercharged.  The  High  Court  has
also  correctly  held  that  the  mere  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  assaulted  his  wife,
mother and child was not ipso facto suggestive of his being an insane person.

27. So,  also  the  fact  that  he  had  not  escaped  from  the  place  of  occurrence  was  no
reason  by  itself  to  declare  him  to  be  a  person  of  unsound  mind  incapable  of
understanding  the  nature  of  the  acts  committed  by  him.  Experience  has  shown  that
different individuals react differently to same or similar situations. Some may escape
from  the  scene  of  occurrence,  others  may  not  while  some  may  even  walk  to  the
police  station  to  surrender  and  report  about  what  they  have  done.  Such  post  event
conduct  may  be  relevant  to  determine  the  culpability  of  the  offender  in  the  light  of
other evidence on record, but the conduct of not fleeing from the spot would not in
itself  show  that  the  person  concerned  was  insane  at  the  time  of  the  commission  of
the offence.

2 8 . That  brings  us  to  the  nature  of  offence  committed  by  the  Appellant  and  the
quantum  of  sentence  that  would  meet  the  ends  of  justice.  The  courts  below  have
found the Appellant guilty of murder of baby Abirami and awarded a life sentence to
the Appellant apart from 10 years rigorous imprisonment for the offence of attempt to
murder Dhanalakshmi and imprisonment of one year under Section 342 of the I.P.C.
In the circumstances of the case we see no reason to alter the conviction or sentence
under Section 342 of the I.P.C. We also see no reason to interfere with the conviction
of  the  Appellant  under  Section  307  of  the  I.P.C.  except  that  instead  of  10  years
rigorous  imprisonment  of  7  years,  should  in  our  view  suffice.  The  conviction  of  the
Appellant  under  Section  302  of  the  I.P.C.  is  not,  however,  justified.  We  say  so  for
reasons more than one. In the first place there was no pre-meditation in the assault
upon  the  deceased.  The  evidence  on  record  shows  that  the  family  had  gone  to  bed
after  dinner  around  9  p.m.  The  quarrel  between  the  Appellant  husband  and
Dhanalakshmi  his  wife  started  around  12  midnight  and  escalated  into  an  assault  on
the  later  around  one  a.m.  That  the  quarrel  was  sudden  and  without  any
premeditation, is evident from the deposition of the two injured witnesses.

2 9 . Secondly,  because  in  the  assault  following  the  quarrel,  the  Appellant  used  a
sharp edged cutting weapon against his wife and mother.  Incised wounds sustained
by  the  said  two  ladies  bear  testimony  to  this  part  of  the  prosecution  case.  The
deceased  Abirami  was  at  this  stage  of  the  occurrence,  in  another  room  wholly
unconnected to the incident.

30. Thirdly,  because  the  Appellant  had  because  of  the  sudden  fight  with  his  wife

                                                                         

assaulted her in the heat of passion and injured his mother who intervened to save
her. The noise and wails of the injured woke up the deceased sleeping in the adjacent
room who started crying thereby attracting the Appellant's attention towards her.

31. Fourthly,  because  the  assault  on  the  deceased  caused  only  two  injuries  with  a
resultant fracture. The injuries were described by the doctor as under:

1. Lacerated injury measuring 2 x 0.5 cm. x 0.5 cm. Seen on middle of (R)
Eyebrow. Lesion covered with blood clots.

2 . Contusion  ?  faint  reddish  blue  in  colour  seen  on  (L)  side  of  face  and
temporal  region  of  head.  8  cm.  x  8  cm.  inside.  Lesions  are  antemortem  in
nature. Faint suggilations fixed on back of trunk.

32. Fifthly, because the Appellant did not evidently use the sharp edged weapon for
causing  injuries  to  the  deceased  as  he  had  done  in  the  case  of  Dhanalakshmi  and
Valli,  PWs  2  and  3  respectively.  In  the  circumstances  we  are  inclined  to  hold  that
there  was  no  intention  on  the  part  of  the  Appellant  to  cause  the  death  of  the
deceased, though looking to the nature of the injuries suffered by the deceased, the
Appellant  must  be  presumed  to  have  the  knowledge  that  the  same  were  likely  to
cause  death.  The  fact  remains  that  the  Appellant  committed  culpable  homicide
without premeditation in a sudden fight and in the heat of passion. The fact that the
Appellant did not use the sharp edged weapon with which he was armed also shows
that he did not act in a cruel or unusual manner nor did he take an undue advantage.
It is evident from the deposition of Dhanalakshmi, that she did not see the Appellant
assaulting the deceased.  It is, therefore, just possible that a hard blow given to the
deceased  by  his  bare  hand  itself  threw  the  child  down  from  the  bed  causing  the
injuries that proved fatal.

33. In the result, we allow this appeal in part, and in modification of the judgments
and orders under appeal convict the Appellant under Section 304 Part-II and sentence
him  to  undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a  period  of  ten  years.  The  reduced
sentence  of  seven  years  rigorous  imprisonment  awarded  to  the  Appellant  for  the
offence  of  attempt  to  murder  and  one  year  rigorous  imprisonment  for  the  offence
punishable  under  Section  342  I.P.C.  shall  all  run  concurrently  with  the  sentence
awarded  under  Section  304-Part  II.  The  sentence  awarded  in  default  of  payment  of
fine shall stand affirmed. The Appellant shall be entitled to the benefit of Section 428
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.



                                                                       

