Vasant Maruti Waikar vs State Of Maharashtra on 30 April, 1990


JUDGMENT

1. This Criminal Appeal, along with companion Criminal Appeal No. 695 of 1989, has been preferred
against convictions and sentences imposed on the two accused in Special Case No. 3 of 1986. The
facts are most distressing concerning as they do with corrupt practices often indulged in by lawyers
and clerks around the Courts who collect money from litigants on the assurance of securing
favourable verdicts and ruin the reputation of the Judge and the judiciary in general, but the
redeeming factor being the exemplary manner in which the learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class,
Miraj, and the learned Special Judge, Kolhapur, both of whom I will have occasion to compliment in
the course of the judgment, have handled the complaints that went up to them. The present
appellant, who was accused No. 1, is a Senior Advocate from Kolhapur, and in addition to this was
also functioning as a Senior Police Prosecutor assigned to the Judicial Magistrate's Court at Satara.
Accused No. 2 at the relevant time was an advocate's clerk attached to the Court at Miraj. The
incident in question took place in the month of March 1984. The learned Judicial Magistrate, First
Class, Miraj, Mr. Bhosale, was at that time hearing Criminal Case No. 129 of 1981, which case
pertained to a prosecution instituted by the Miraj Railway Police in relation to the theft of
aluminium wire in the year 1980. Originally, there were as many as 14 accused in that case, but
some of them are supposed to have died in the course of the trial. The evidence in the matter and the
arguments were apparently over and it appears that the decision in that case was expected in the
month of March 1984. The Police Prosecutor appearing on behalf of the State was one advocate Raja
and the defence advocate was Mr. Narwadkar. It appears that the learned defense advocate had
informed the two accused with whom we are immediately concerned, one Sakhalchand and
Shantilal, that the decision was likely to be against them and that they were likely to be convicted in
that proceeding. Thereupon Sakhalchand is alleged to have contacted accused No. 2, who was an
advocate's clerk at the Court and who appeared to have been the regular Court clerk of Advocate
Shah and he is supposed to have asked accused No. 2 as to what could be done under the
circumstances to avoid a conviction. Accused No. 2 is alleged to have stated that though he was
helpless in the matter that he would take Sakhalchand and Shantilal to one advocate at Kolhapur,
i.e., accused No. 1, who could do their work. At the meeting with accused No. 1, it is alleged that he
agreed to do the needful, i.e., to ensure that these two accused were acquitted provided they paid a
sum of Rs. 5,000/- each which, in turn, accused No. 1 was to hand over to the learned Judicial
Magistrate. Pursuant to this arrangement, the Prosecution alleges that on 17-3-1984, accused Nos. 1
and 2, accompanied by Sakhalchand, went by a taxi to Miraj in the evening. Accused No. 1 went to
the residence of Judicial Magistrate Bhosale and came back stating that he had gone out and would
be back in an hour's time. Once again accused No. 1 went to the residence of Judicial Magistrate
Bhosale and after half an hour came back and told these persons that they would have to come again
as the Judicial Magistrate was busy and he could not talk to him.

2. Thereafter on 19-3-1984, it is alleged that once again the same group of persons made a trip to
Miraj, and on this occasion accused No. 1 met the learned Judicial Magistrate when he was leaving




the chambers. After exchanging some pleasantries, he brought up the subject of the theft case and
told the learned Judicial Magistrate that there was practically no evidence in that matter. The
learned Judicial Magistrate immediately reacted, rather strongly, and told accused No. 1 not to talk
about the pending proceeding and that this would be decided on merits. Accused No. 1 excused
himself by requesting the learned Judicial Magistrate not to take the matter amiss and came back to
the taxi where accused No. 2, Shantilal and the driver were waiting. According to the Prosecution,
on the way from Kolhapur, Shantilal handed over to accused No. 1 an amount of Rs. 10,000/-, which
was in notes of Rs. 50/- denomination. On reaching Miraj, accused No. 1 asked accused No. 2 to get
the notes changed to those of Rs. 100/- denomination as the earlier bundle was too bulky. Accused
No. 2 accordingly complied.

3. The Prosecution further alleges that on the way back, pursuant to Sakhalchand's enquiry, accused
No. 1 assured him that his work would be done, but accused No. 1 told him that the amount was still
with him and Sakhalchand is alleged to have told accused No. 1 that he could give the money to the
learned Judicial Magistrate at his own convenience. The judgment in this case, which was scheduled
for 22-3-1984, was thereafter adjourned to 29-3-1984 on which date Judicial Magistrate Bhonsale
pronounced the judgment convicting both Sakhalchand and Shantilal. It is alleged that accused No.
1 had attented the Miraj Court on that date and that he was met by several of his colleagues who
asked him the purpose of his visit to which accused No. 1 stated that since he was known to a
particular litigant that he had come in connection with that case. After the judgment was
pronounced, it is alleged that Sakhalchand and Shantilal insisted that since their work had not been
done that accused No. 1 should use that money to pay the fine of Rs. 5,000/- and Rs. 2,000/-
respectively that were imposed on them. Accused No. 1 stated that he did not have any money with
him whereupon on argument ensured and it is alleged that in the course of this altercation that
Sakhalchand referred to the fact that accused No. 1 had taken money from them on the pretext of
paying the same to the learned Judicial Magistrate. This altercation was overheard by Advocate
Mohamad Hanif Shaikh (PW 3) and he is alleged to have instructed witness Ilahi Usman Kurne (PW
1), who was a peon attached to the learned Judicial Magistrate, to bring this fact to the notice of the
learned Judicial Magistrate. Kurana is supposed to have informed the learned Judicial Magistrate
on the evening of 30th March 1984, i.e., the day after the judgment, that accused No. 1 had collected
money from the litigants in the name of the learned Judicial Magistrate. On 3-4-1984, Sakhalchand
saw the learned Judicial Magistrate in chambers and informed him of the fact that accused Nos. 1
and 2 have been instrumental in collecting an amount of Rs. 10,000/- in the name of the learned
Judicial Magistrate for the purpose of occurring acquittal of himself and Shantilal and that not only
had this amount been wrongfully retained by those persons but that they were refusing to return the
same. The learned Judicial Magistrate immediately had the complaint recorded and took down the
signature of Sakhalchand on the document. On 5-4-1984, the learned Judicial Magistrate sent a
written complaint to the learned District Judge recording the fact that a serious incident had taken
place where by accused Nos. 1 and 2 had collected a large amount of money in the name of the
learned Judicial Magistrate on the pretext that the same would be paid to him as a bribe. The
learned District Judge took a serious view of the matter and instructed Judicial Magistrate Bhosale
to send for the remaining persons who had knowledge of the facts of this case and to record all their
statements. It was pursuant to this instruction that Judicial Magistrate Bhonsale took the unusual
step of sending for advocate Shaikh (P.W. 3).




4. We then come to the most serious aspect of this case, namely, what transpired when Sakhalchand
is alleged to have gone to accused No. 2 and to accused No. 1 and asked them for the account for the
amount of Rs. 13,000/- which he is alleged to have paid them. According to Sakhalchand, apart
from the amount of Rs. 10,000/- which was to be paid as a bribe to the learned Judicial Magistrate,
accused Nos. 1 and 2 had demanded certain amount as their so-called "fees" for their roles in the
operation. On Sakhalchand informing the two accused of the fact that he had lodged a complaint
with the learned Judicial Magistrate, it is alleged that accused No. 2 told Sakhalchand that he should
not have done this because he will put accused No. 1 into serious trouble and that he will lose his
service thereby. Thereafter on 15-4-1984, which day was a Sunday, accused Nos. 1 and 2, along with
an identifying witness, took Sakhalchand to the Judicial Magistrate's Court at Kolhapur and met the
Nazir who had come there to catch up with some work. Prior to this accused No. 1 had telephoned
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kolhapur, Mr. Hiremath, and informed him that an urgent affidavit
had to be affirmed, that he would get the necessary stamping etc. done and requested for permission
for the deponent to come to the residence of the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kolhapur.
Accordingly, Sakhalchand was first taken to the Court, the necessary formalities completed and
thereafter he was sent to the residence of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, where he affirmed the
affidavit in question.

5. It is significant to point out that this affidavit executed on a Sunday under conditions of unusual
hurry and haste was prepared for the purpose of nullifying the complaint lodged by Sakhalchand in
so far as it clearly stated that he was alleged to have been in a frightened state of mind, that he
wrongly lodged the complaint, that the complaint was false and that he had not paid any money to
anybody. This affidavit, in turn, along with a covering letter, also drafted out by accused No. 1 and
signed by Sakhalchand, reiterating what was stated in the affidavit, was sent by post to the learned
District Judge, Sangli, and a zerox copy of the document was forwarded to the learned Judicial
Magistrate Bhosale, This was followed by one more letter ostensibly from Sakhalchand again
confirming the earlier position which was sent to the learned District Judge at the end of April 1984.
On receipt of the report from Judicial Magistrate Bhonsale and the copies of the complaint and the
supporting statements, the learned District Judge forwarded the matter to the Anti-Corruption
Bureau Authorities who, in turn, registered an offence against accused Nos. 1 and 2 and placed them
under arrest. The accused were subsequently charge-sheeted and put up for trial. The learned
Special Judge, Kolhapur, by his judgment and order dated 28-8-1989, convicted both the accused on
all counts except the charge u/S. 161 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default, to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for six months. It is against this conviction and sentence that the present appeals
have been filed.

6. Mr. Chitnis, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of accused No. 1, made a special application
before my brother Moharir, J., pointing out that accused No. 1 has been served with a notice by the
State Government asking him to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service and
having regard to this and several other compelling circumstances of acute family hardships that the
appeal should be heard immediately and disposed of on a out-of-turn basis. Moharir, J. granted the
application and the appeals were accordingly placed high on board before me.




7. Having regard to immense importance of this appeal, the Government of Maharashtra had
appointed Mr. Suryavanshi as a Special Public Prosecutor in this case and the matter had to be
adjourned more than once as the learned Special Public Prosecutor was unable to attend this Court
for personal and family reasons. Since the appeals could not be delayed, Mr. R. F. Lambay, the
learned Assistant Public Prosecutor was instructed to appear in place of Mr. Suryavanshi, though for
want of time no formal resolution appointing Mr. Lambay as Special Public Prosecutor has been
passed. Having regard to the fact that the record in these appeals is voluminous, that several
important points were required to be studied and argued and above all that Mr. Lambay has done an
excellent job as a Special Public Prosecutor in this case, to my mind, this is a fit case in which the
State Government should pay to him special fees.

8. This being a prosecution under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act and the
corresponding sections of the Indian Penal Code, valid sanction is a necessary prerequisite for the
prosecution. Before the Trial Court, Accused No. 1 had seriously challenged the validity of the
sanction order on the ground that the sanction accorded by Shri S. S. Jog at Exhibit (20) in his
capacity as the Director General and Inspector General of Police, Maharashtra State, Bombay, was
not a valid sanction. To summarize, the argument advanced was that accused No. 1, being a Police
Prosecutor, the Director General of Police was not the competent authority for the purpose of
appointing Accused No. 1 nor was he competent to remove him from service. In so far as by a
resolution dated 2-5-1983, the Home Department had clarified that Police Prosecutors appointed
under the provisions of Rule 60 of the Police Manual, Volume I, as per the recruitment rules shall be
deemed to have been appointed by the State Government as Assistant Public Prosecutors for the
purpose of S. 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It was further contended that by virtue of
this resolution, only the State Government could be regarded as the competent authority for the
purpose of granting sanction.

9. At the hearing of the appeal, Mr. Chitnis, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant-accused No. 1, has not dealt with the sanction order point at all. The reason for it is quite
obvious in so far as the objections raised have been adequately dealt with by the Trial Court and
rightly overruled. It is now wellsettled law that the primary object of the insistence on a valid
sanction is in order to ensure that a superior authority of competent rank has applied its mind to the
facts of the case and that a prosecution has been ordered in a situation where such a course of action
was essential. We have on record the evidence of the Director General of Police himself, who has
very clearly deposed to the fact that after going through the investigation papers, he was fully
satisfied that this was a case where a prosecution was essential. What is crucial is the fact that the
Director General of Police states that the Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
Maharashtra, had forwarded to him Confidential Letter dated 16-1-1986 along with which letter the
case papers were forwarded to the Director General of Police. The Additional Secretary, Home
Department, undoubtedly, was a competent authority to accord the sanction and Exhibit 22 very
clearly indicates that the Additional Secretary had applied his mind to the facts of the case while
forwarding the case papers to the Director General and that he had directed the issuance of the
sanction for the prosecution. Under these circumstances, the technical objection raised that the
Director General of Police was not the competent authority becomes wholly irrelevant because it is
very clear that not one but two high ranking authorities had applied their minds to the facts of the





case and accorded the sanction and, furthermore, that the Director General of Police had acted
under the authority delegated to him. Mr. Lambey, the learned Special Public Prosecutor, has,
however, pointed out that the sanction order coupled with Exhibit 22 were a complete answer to the
objection canvassed before the Trial Court and that, consequently, nothing survives in this
objection. To my mind, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant-accused No. 1 were
well advised not to reagitate this issue which has been very correctly concluded by the Trial Court.

10. On merits, Mr. Chitnis, learned counsel appearing on behalf of accused No. 1, has, at the very
outset, pointed out that accused No. 1 at the relevant time was a Senior Advocate and a Senior Police
Prosecutor and that, consequently, the case had generated not only a lot of interest but a lot of
prejudice. He submitted that under these circumstances, in fairness to accused No. 1 who is a
professional advocate, the Court should view the evidence from a totally dispassionate point of view
because it is essentially his case that the complainant, Sakhalchand, and Shantilal have joined
together and lodged a false complaint and that accused No. 1 has faced very serious repercussions as
a result of their fabricated evidence. Mr. Chitnis, at the outset, stated that he will demonstrate from
the record that witness Sakhalchand, who is the complainant in this case, was admittedly an accused
person in the Prosecution before Judicial Magistrate Bhosale on a theft charge, that he has admitted
the number of prosecutions in which he was earlier involved and many of which were still pending,
that he has made an affidavit totally reselling from the complaint lodged by him and that he has
thereafter gone back even on that affidavit and that he is, under these circumstances, a thoroughly
unreliable witness and one whose evidence will have to be rejected outright. Mr. Chitnis has raised a
point of law, namely, that the evidence of witness Sakhalchand is the bedrock or virtual foundation
on which the infrastructure of the Prosecution case rests and that admittedly in law this witness was
an accomplice. Mr. Chitnis submitted that the law is now well settled particularly with regard to
corruption charges that the complainant in a corruption case is an accomplice and, consequently,
that his evidence cannot be relied upon for a conviction unless it is fully corroborated in all material
particulars. Mr. Chitnis has relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Khilli Ram v.
State of Rajasthan, , wherein the Supreme Court has observed that the principle of law laid down in
the case of State of Bihar v. Basawan Singh, , which is to the effect that where the witness is an
accomplice, though the evidence is admissible in law, the Judge should indicate in his judgment that
he had the rule of caution in mind and give reasons for considering it unnecessary to require
corroboration. It is, however, true that the Supreme Court has in the case of Prakash Chand v. State
(Delhi Admn.), 1979 SCC (Cri) 656 : (1979 Cri LJ 329), and in the case of Kishan Chand Mangal v.
State of Rajasthan, , upheld the principle that even uncorroborated testimony of trap witnesses can
be acted upon. However, after the amendment to the Indian Penal Code and the introduction of S.
165A since the person who offers a bribe or agrees to offer it is in the legal position of an accomplice,
the Courts have taken the view that it is a salutary principle that in corruption cases the evidence of
an accomplice must be corroborated. The additional reason for this is because the accused is
invariably a public servant and the consequences of a conviction are so grave and far-reaching to
him that it is very necessary to guard against any possibility of an incorrect verdict.

11. Mr. Lambay, the learned Special Public Prosecutor, has vehemently contested the above position
and he has submitted that u/S. 133 of the Evidence Act, not only is the testimony of an accomplice
admissible but that the law specifically provides that a conviction based on the evidence of such a





witness shall be legal. Mr. Lambay submitted that the evidence of Sakhalchand does inspire
confidence and that in the peculiar facts of this case, he cannot be branded as an accomplice because
this is not a trap case where handing over of the money was done by him. Mr. Lambay seeks to
distinguish the present case on facts and to point out that as far as Sakhalchand is concerned, once
accused Nos. 1 and 2 assured him of an acquittal and asked him to pay the prescribed amount of Rs.
10,000/- that he only handed over the amount to the accused and that he had no part whatsoever in
either conveying or paying the same to the judicial officer. To this extent, Mr. Lambay submitted
that the submission canvassed by Mr. Chitnis is inapplicable in the present case.

12. The law with regard to the evidence of a complainant in corruption cases is now well crystallised
and it is a necessary rule of caution that the evidence of a complainant must be corroborated
through independent and reliable evidence. In the present case, one has to bear in mind the fact that
even though Sakhalchand lodged a complaint with Judicial Magistrate Bhosale on 3-4-1984 against
the two accused specifically alleging that they had collected Rs. 10,000/- from him in the name of
the Judicial Magistrate on the assurance that they would secure an acquittal, that he has within the
course of the next three weeks made an affidavit on oath and sent two covering letters stating that
this complaint was incorrect. In his evidence, Sakhalchand has explained that, in the first instance,
he was persuaded to sign the affidavit and the letters by accused No. 1 on the ground that otherwise
accused No. 1 would come into serious trouble and would lose his service, but it has also come in the
evidence that there was a further inducement, namely, that accused No. 1 offered to refund the
money to Sakhalchand if he signed the documents. One cannot lose sight of the fact that accused No.
1 was not only a Senior Lawyer but a Senior Police Prosecutor and that, undoubtedly, he wielded
considerable clout, both professionally and otherwise. Under these circumstances, the explanation
of Sakhalchand that it was accused No. 1 who virtually pressurised him into appending his signature
to the affidavit and to the other documents is a perfectly valid explanation. There is the evidence of
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kolhapur, Mr. Hiremath (P.W. 14), which conclusively establishes
that it was accused No. 1 who displayed abnormal hurry on Sunday, 15-4-1984, in getting affidavit of
Sakhalchand affirmed. The Nazir of the Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court, Mr. Najir Mokashi (P.W.
15), has identified accused Nos. 1 and 2, who had brought Sakhalchand to the Court on that day
along with the affidavit. This degree of haste coupled with the fact that Sakhalchand has stated
before the Court that the affidavit in question was taken by accused No. 1 and so also the signatures
on the two covering letters and that it was accused No. 1 who forwarded these to the learned District
Judge, all add up to the most conclusive and incriminating evidence against accused No. 1. Had
accused Nos. 1 and 2 not had any part to play in the incident relating to the collection of money from
Sakhalchand, there would have been no need to make this desperate attempt to nullify the effect of
the complaint that had been filed by Sakhalchand.

13. The matter does not rest there because accused No. 1 as an advocate was aware of the fact that he
was getting Sakhalchand to swear a false affidavit on oath and, furthermore, he was using this false
document for the purpose of interfering with and nullifying the effect of the complaint that had
already been lodged with a judicial officer on a serious charge. Obviously, Accused No. 1 was aware
of the fact that the complaint would culminate in a prosecution and the affidavit, therefore, becomes
all the more important because it was clearly executed with the sole object of scuttling the
Prosecution and confronting Sakhalchand with a sworn affidavit which runs directly contrary to the





complaint lodged by him. It is quite clear that the whole object was to interfere with the course of
the future judicial proceeding and to tamper with the evidence that had already come on record. It is
deplorable that the two Accused, both of whom were connected closely with the legal profession,
were associated in an act of this type. Mr. Lambay, the learned Special Public Prosecutor, has rightly
submitted that the evidence of Sakhalchand, who has been cross-examined in very great detail,
remains totally unshaken save and except for the attempt to contradict him with his own affidavit
dated 15-4-1984. Once it has come on record that this affidavit was procured by the Accused under
thoroughly dishonest and criminal circumstances, the question of regarding this contradictory
affidavit as a blemish on Sakhalchand's evidence virtually disappears. All that remains thereafter is
the question of looking for corroboration to that evidence. Sakhalchand has stated in great detail
about how he had met Accused No. 2, his meetings with Accused No. 1, the trips made by them to
Miraj on 17-3-1984 and on 19-4-1984 when he was told that the Accused were to arrange for his
acquittal after meeting the learned Judicial Magistrate and also the fact that apart from the amount
of Rs. 10,000/- which had been handed over by him to the Accused that they had also demanded a
certain additional amount as their "fees". The totality of this evidence very clearly indicates that
Sakhalchand had, in fact, paid these amounts of money to the Accused and that there is sufficient
material on record to support his version that the purpose of paying this money was to corrupt
Judicial Magistrate Bhosale. It is not out of place at this stage for me to mention that Accused No. 1
was a public servant, apart from being a member of the legal profession, and that he had
volunteered to misuse his position and attempt to influence Judicial Magistrate Bhosale for the
purpose of securing an acquittal which under normal circumstances appeared to be difficult. It has
further come on record that the money was collected by these persons in the name of Judicial
Magistrate Bhosale without so much as the learned Judicial Magistrate knowing that these persons
were defiling his name and collecting money on his behalf. It is most reprehensible that acts of this
type have been indulged in by an advocate and an advocate's clerk and it was rightly submitted by
Mr. Lambay, the learned Special Public Prosecutor, that this is a case of utmost seriousness because
it indicates the level of corruption that has polluted the working of the law Courts whereby the name
and reputation of honest judicial officers and persons with integrity is being tarnished and defiled by
unscrupulous members of the Bar and by persons belonging to the Court staff who collect amounts
of money from gullible litigants without the learned Judges being even aware of it. Mr. Lambay
further pointed out, and quite justifiably, that had the case in question ended in an acquittal that
Sakhalchand and Shantilal would have genuinely believed that Accused Nos. 1 and 2 had secured the
acquittal for them and that Judicial Magistrate Bhosale has acquitted them because the amount of
Rs. 10,000/- had reached him. This only worsens the position and clearly indicates a typical
situation of how such a corrupt practice of the most deplorable type is indulged in and how, as a
result of such a practice, the name of the judiciary can be defiled. The present case is a classic
instance of how such efforts can also be effectively frustrated, thanks to the vigilance of the two
judicial officers of great integrity and great courage who, thanks to their presence of mind, have not
only frustrated the corrupt practice but have brought to book the persons indulging in such corrupt
practice. While the learned Magistrate A. D. Bhosale and the learned District. Judge M. B.
Majumdar deserve to be specially commended for their action in this case, it is hoped that more of
the judicial of officers would come out strongly in order to eliminate such corrupt practices which
have reached cancerous levels around the Courts.





14. The next submission canvassed by Mr. Chitnis, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Accused
No. 1, is that the charge of conspiracy u/S. 120B of the Indian Penal Code was misconceived on the
facts of the present case. It is the submission of Mr. Chitnis that there is no evidence with regard to
the meeting of minds, or acting in pursuance of a criminal conspiracy and, consequently, that the
conviction under this charge will have to be set aside. This submission is replied to by the learned
Special Public Prosecutor, who pointed out that right from the very inception, i.e., from the time
when Accused No. 2 took Sakhalchand to the residence of Accused No. 1 that both the Accused in
the presence of Sakhalchand decided to work towards getting him and Shantilal acquitted by
corrupting the learned Judicial Magistrate and, furthermore, by misusing their position to secure
additional amount of money for themselves. It has come on record that Accused Nos. 1 and 2
travelled together along with Sakhalchand on 17th and 19th March 1984 ostensibly to create the
impression on him that they were, in fact, talking to the learned Judicial Magistrate. Mr. Lambay
has pointed out that this is a classic instance of the manner in which a member of the legal
profession misused his position and defrauded a gullible litigant into believing that he has, in fact,
made a contact with the party who is required to be corrupted. Accused No. 1 went and met the
learned Judicial Magistrate and confirmed that in pursuance of his assurance he had spoken to the
learned Judicial Magistrate who would acquit the Accused when, in fact, he had not done anything
of the sort. Apart from this, it is further pointed out that Accused No. 1 had specially come to the
Miraj Court on 29-3-1984, which was the date of the judgment, when Accused No. 1 had not been
able to demonstrate any other reason for his presence there. It has also come on record that Accused
Nos. 1 and 2 were present when the altercation took place after the judgment was pronounced and
that even with regard to the payment of fine, it was obviously pursuant to an arrangement between
the two of them that Accused No. 2 tendered the fine of Rs. 7,500/- on behalf of Sakhalchand and
Shantilal. It cannot, therefore, even be argued that there was no meeting of minds nor could it be
suggested that the two Accused were not acting in furtherance of a criminal conspiracy. To my mind,
the finding of the learned Special Judge that the conspiracy charge stands proved is a perfectly valid
and correct finding and the same deserves to be upheld.

15. With regard to the remaining evidence, it needs to be pointed out that the learned Special Public
Prosecutor, who has appeared in this case before the Trial Court, has done an admirable and
excellent job while conducting an extremely difficult case of this type. One of the interesting features
of this case is that several of the witnesses have turned hostile. This is a disturbing feature because I
have already had occasion to refer to the fact that serious efforts were made by the Accused to
destroy the evidence of Sakhalchand by getting him to sign a false and fabricated Affidavit and two
covering letters in addition to this, there can be no doubt about the fact that certain influences were
at work when witness after witnesses displayed a tendency to turn hostile. That the Accused had
nothing to do with the process of tampering with these witnesses would be difficult to accept. In a
case where a witness or more than one of them turns hostile, the Court will have to take judicial
notice of the fact that the only beneficiary of such a situation is the accused and consequently an
appropriate adverse inference will follow. Unless an attempt has been made to tamper with the
evidence, a witness will not completely resile from his earlier statement, and such efforts can only be
traced back to the beneficiary of such a corrupt practice. The hostile witnesses have, however, been
cross-examined and the material portions of their police statements have been brought on record,
and by and large this evidence has been proved through the evidence of the Investigating Officers.





Regardless of that entire head of the material, we have on record the deposition of Judicial
Magistrate Bhosale. To my mind, he is the most important witness as far as the present case is
concerned and it was, in fact, a welcome feature that the learned Public Prosecutor requested the
learned Judicial Magistrate to give evidence. Though normally as a Judicial Officer the learned
Magistrate would not have been expected to step into the witness box having regard to the
seriousness of the present case, the learned Special Public Prosecutor was fully justified in
requesting the learned Judicial Magistrate Bhosale to give evidence. Not only has the Judicial
Magistrate very clearly deposed about the complaint lodged with him by the Complainant on
3-4-1984 but he has further deposed about the two meetings which Accused No. 1 had with him on
17-3-1984 and 19-3-1984. Mr. Chitnis, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Accused No. 1, has
seriously disputed the evidence relating to these two meetings and it is his submission that the
meeting of 17-3-1984 did not take place at all and that as far as the meeting of 19-3-1984 is
concerned that Accused No. 1 had merely dropped in for a few minutes to pay his respectly to the
learned Judicial Magistrate since he had earlier worked in his Court and that only because of
Sakhalchand's complaint and the mention of the date of 19-3-1984 that the learned Judicial
Magistrate has wrongly imputed motives to Accused No. 1. Undoubtedly, the learned Judicial
Magistrate is quite clear about these two dates, on the first of which he had gone with the family to
witness a movie and on the second of which he was working late after playing a game of volleyball.
The learned Judicial Magistrate is quite clear with regard to the most important aspect of his
evidence, namely, that Accused No. 1 after meeting him on 17-3-1984 hesitated and left the place
without saying anything on the ground that the learned Judicial Magistrate was tired. This was
unusual conduct, but to my mind guilty conduct because Accused No. 1 obviously on that day felt
apprehensive about the delicacy of his mission because he was not quite certain as to whether the
learned Judicial Magistrate would give into his corrupt suggestion or not. Accused No. 1, however,
renewed his attempt after two days and on this occasion, according to the learned Judicial
Magistrate, he specifically referred to the case but stopped short when the Judicial Magistrate pulled
him up. This evidence of the learned Judicial Magistrate lends all the corroboration that is necessary
to the version of Sakhalchand that has emerged in the complaint. It is necessary to bear in mind that
regardless of the subsequent affidavit and letters, Sakhalchand has stuck to his version that was
contained in the original complaint when he gave evidence before the Court. It is true that
Sakhalchand is a person with a rather dubious background which is the explanation as to why he
was so anxious not to get convicted, which also explains why he approached Accused No. 2 to try for
the extra-legal operation. The evidence of Judicial Magistrate Bhosale is thereafter supported by the
evidence of two groups of witnesses which I shall refer to in passing.

16. The first of these witnesses is the peon of the learned Judicial Magistrate by name Kurane (P.W.
1). Kurane has stated that he reported to Judicial Magistrate Bhosale on the evening of 30th March
1984 what advocate Shaikh had conveyed to him, namely, that Accused No. 1 had accepted money in
the name of the learned Judicial Magistrate. Kurane is only a peon working in the Court and it is
impossible to assume that he would have the courage to fabricate evidence of such a serious nature.
Moreover, Magistrate Bhosale had also admitted this. Kurane's evidence, in turn, is supported by
the evidence of advocate Shaikh. This advocate has stated that he was following the case in question
because it was an interesting one and that he was present in Court on 29-3-1984. After the
Judgment was pronounced, he was a witness to the altercation that took place and he specifically





overheard the reference made by Sakhalchand to the effect that the Accused had collected money in
the name of the Judicial Magistrate. Mr. Chitnis has seriously assailed the evidence of advocate
Shaikh (P.W. 3) by pointing out that he is himself involved in a corruption prosecution and,
furthermore, that having regard to the fact that rivalries exist at the Bar that one will have to take his
submissions with a high degree of caution. More seriously, Mr. Chitnis has pointed out that if at all
advocate Shaikh had overheard such a conversation and he desired to convey it to the learned
Judicial Magistrate, one would have expected him as an advocate, to have gone to Judicial
Magistrate Bhosale himself and not to have used the channel of his peon. It is true that advocate
Shaikh ought not to have conveyed statements of this type or information of such gravity to the
learned Judicial Magistrate through witness Kurane. However, one cannot lose sight of an all
important fact, namely, that even though in the initial report made by Judicial Magistrate Bhosale
on 5-4-1984 to the District Judge there is no specific mention of any complaint from or on behalf of
advocate Shaikh that immediately after his report learned, Judicial Magistrate Bhosale in the course
of recording statements of various witnesses has taken down the statement of advocate shaikh (P.W.
3). If, as pointed out by Mr. Chitnis, Mr. Shaikh was not present there and he had not heard
anything, it is inconceivable as to how and under what circumstances Judicial Magistrate Bhosale
would have sent for him (Advocate Shaikh) and recorded his statement. The non-mention of the
name of advocate Shaikh in the Magistrate's initial complaint to the District Judge as also the fact
that he had conveyed even through Kurane (P.W. 1) information of this importance has been
seriously criticised by Mr. Chitnis, who pointed out that these two witnesses have been deliberately
brought forward by the Prosecution in order to link Accused No. 1 with the incident of 29-3-1984.
Mr. Chitnis submitted that Accused No. 1 has pointed out in his statement recorded under S. 313 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 that he had gone to the Miraj Court on 29-3-1984 in
connection with some other work, that there was no secret about his visit there is so far as he has
met several members of the Bar, including his own colleagues who were Police Prosecutors, and that
in order to implicate Accused No. 1 these two witnesses have been asked to depose about the
so-called altercation that took place in the Court premises. Unfortunately, we have the evidence of
Sakhalchand himself, who refers to this incident in detail, as also the evidence of advocate Shaikh,
who as a member of the Bar would not normally come forward to fabricate evidence against a Senior
Police Prosecutor a case of this seriousness, regardless of how severe the professional competition or
rivalry may be. Significantly, nothing has been brought on record, even by way of suggestions in the
cross-examination of advocate Shaikh, to indicate as to why he would fabricate evidence against a
professional colleague. We are, therefore, left with the evidence not only of the Judicial Magistrate
but the evidence of advocate Shaikh (P.W. 3), also a member of the profession, both of which has
been relied upon by the learned Special Judge and, to my mind, quite rightly.

17. There is another head of supportive evidence which is not of immense consequence, but it does
require to be referred to. The Prosecution has examined some of the witnesses from the Court, who
were present on 29-3-1984, for the purpose of establishing the presence of Accused No. 1 in the
Court on that date. Though, under normal circumstances Accused No. 1, who is a Senior Advocate
and a Police Prosecutor and who had worked in that Court earlier, could have visited the Court for
any other reason, in the light of the background of this case and his connection with the
Sakhalchand matter, his presence in the Court and at the time when the altercation took place does
present an extremely incriminating circumstance against him. There can be little doubt about the




fact that even after his unsuccessful attempt to corrupt Judicial Magistrate Bhosale that he had still
not given up hope and was trying to play safe; because if the judgment had resulted in an acquittal
all would have been well for him but if not, it was necessary for him to safeguard against things
going wrong. This fully explains how after the altercation that took place, the fine of as large amount
as Rs. 7,500/- came to be deposited by Accused No. 2, though there is no direct evidence of how and
from where Accused No. 2 got this amount. One cannot rule out the suspicion that since Accused
No. 1 and Accused No. 2 had been acting in consort at all times prior to that stage that there was
every possibility that between the two of them the payment of the fine was arranged for. However, it
must be admitted that there is no direct evidence with regard to this aspect of the Prosecution case.

18. There is one other witness who is of some consequence, namely, the driver of the car in which
the accused had travelled to Miraj on 17-3-1984 and on 19-3-1984 as also on 29-3-1984. The driver
of the car, Bharat Mane (P.W. 4), has deposed about these trips and he has also corroborated
Sakhalchand's evidence with regard to the handing over of money and the changing of notes from
Rs. 50/- denomination to Rs. 100/- denomination. As far as this witness is concerned, Mr. Chitnis
has pointed out that, in the first instance, his evidence with regard to the identity of accused No. 1 is
vague. Secondly, Mr. Chitnis has pointed out that this witness has turned hostile and even though
his police Statement has been brought on record, in the course of the cross-examination, that not all
the contradictions have been proved through the Investigating officer. As against this, Mr. Lambay,
the learned Special Public Prosecutor, has pointed out that the witness has clearly deposed about the
fact that he was able to identify both Accused Nos. 1 and 2 and that he was known to Sakhalchand.
Furthermore, this witness has given the location of the residence of Accused No. 1 in Kolhapur at
Pratibha Nagar. In the cross-examination of this witness, strangely enough, it has come on record
that he had also seen the Name Board of Accused No. 1 at that place. Since there is sufficient
evidence on record to establish that the trips on 17-3-1984 and on 19-3-1984 had, in fact, been
made, to my mind, the minor infirmities of this evidence are of inconsequence.

19. Two other witnesses, Babalal Mujawar (P.W. 8) and Shankar More (P.W. 9), both of whom were
co-accused in the Prosecution that was pending before Judicial Magistrate Bhosale, have also been
examined. These witnesses have been examined on another point for the purpose of establishing
that Sakhalchand and Shantilal are alleged to have contacted these two persons and informed them
that they were assured of an acquittal in the criminal case if they paid Rs. 5,000/- each and that
these two witnesses were asked whether they were interested in a similar benefit. The evidence of
these witnesses is to the effect that they replied that neither of them could afford to pay the amount.
The evidence of these two witnesses is not of much significance except that it lends a high degree of
support to the general Prosecution case, which is to the effect that an arrangement had, in fact, been
planned out and finalised for the purpose of corrupting Judicial Magistrate Bhosale and securing an
acquittal and that this arrangement was through the medium of Accused Nos. 1 and 2.

20. Miss Dandekar, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Accused No. 2, has pointed out that
even though a conspiracy charge has been framed against the two Accused that the Prosecution has
proceeded on the footing that Accused No. 1 was the main offender and that most of the evidence led
was concerning Accused No. 1. Miss Dandekar pointed out that as for as Accused No. 2 was
concerned, that there is hardly any reference to this Accused and that even the stray acts attributed




to him are to the effect that he is alleged to have taken Sakhalchand to meet Accused No. 1 and that
he had accompanied them on two trips to Miraj and, furthermore, that he was present in Magistrate
Bhosale's Court on 29-3-1984 when the judgment was pronounced. Miss Dandekar pointed out that
all these circumstances, even if taken individually or collectively, are innocuous circumstances in
their own right and that, consequently, even if the Prosecution allegation against Accused No. 1 are
established that the finding of guilt against Accused No. 2 is not sustainable. I am unable to accept
this submission because, as pointed out earlier, this is a case where conspiracy has been alleged and
established. The exact nature of the roles of the co-conspirators does not have to be equal or similar.
Furthermore, it has come on record that Accused No. 2 was the person who initially took
Sakhalchand to Accused No. 1 for the purpose of planning out and executing the entire operation. A
lawyer's clerk who when approached by a litigant with a request that a Judicial Magistrate be
approached in a pending criminal case and who takes the litigant to a particular member of the Bar
and gets the operation underway cannot be said to have acted innocently. That Accused No. 2
selected Accused No. 1 for approaching the Magistrate also indicates that this was obviously not the
first time that the two of them had functioned together. No advocate's clerk would dare to
straightway take a litigant to an honest lawyer for a job of this type unless he was confident that the
lawyer would oblige and more importantly unless the lawyer had acquired a prowess in such
operations. Accused No. 2 did not disassociate himself from the activity thereafter but he has been
present continuously at all times, including in the taxi when the money passed, and it has also come
on record that apart from Accused No. 1, Accused No. 2 had also demanded a fee for having taken
part in this unfortunate and dubious operation. I have carefully scrutinized the record and find
overwhelming evidence against Accused No. 2 on the basis of which the Trial Court has rightly
convicted him. Since most of the evidence is common to the two Accused, it is unnecessary for me to
recount it. In this view of the matter, the conviction of Accused No. 2, along with Accused No. 1, on
the conspiracy charge as also all other heads of charges will have to be upheld.

21. The learned Special Judge has convicted both the Accused under Sections 162, 163, 165A, 426
read with S. 120B of the Indian Penal Code and under S. 5(1)(d) read with S. 5(2) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947. The learned Special Judge has, however, not awarded a separate sentence
under each of these counts, but he has awarded a consolidated sentence of 2 years' rigorous
imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default, rigorous imprisonment for six months. On the
question of sentence, it has been submitted by Mr. Mohite, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of
Accused No. 1, that the court should take into account certain extenuating circumstances set out by
him in the Affidavit that has been filed. To start with, he pointed out that Accused No. 1 has started
his career in the year 1972 as a Police Prosecutor and that he had put in 12 years of service in the
year 1984 when the incident took place and that during this entire period his only source of income
was his meagre salary. It has also come on record, as indicated by Mr. Mohite, that the wife of
Accused No. 1 has been afflicted with a very serious ailment and that she has been suffering
continuously from brain tuberculoma. The medical certificate dated 30-4-1991 from one of the
eminent doctors in Bombay has been produced, which indicates that the lady has been undergoing
treatment for this serious ailment since the year 1983 and that there has been no appreciable
improvement in her condition. Further Mr. Mohite pointed out that Accused No. 1 has been served
with a notice of dismissal by the State Government which will inevitably take effect by virtue of the
confirmation of his conviction and that as a second inevitable result he could also be barred from





practising, having regard to the nature of the conviction against him. Mr. Mohite has further pointed
out that the daughter of Accused No. 1 is a medical student and that his son is studying in the 9th
standard. Apart from these personal factors, Mr. Mohite has advanced the submission that the
incident took place in the year 1984, when Accused No. 1 come to be arrested, and that eight years
have now elapsed during the course of which the judicial proceedings have been going on. He relied
on three decisions of the Supreme Court, the first of them being in the case of Sarupchand v. State of
Punjab, , the second of them being in the case of Tarsem Lal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 806;
and the last of them being the latest decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Balaram Swain v.
State of Orissa, . In all these cases, the Supreme Court has taken special note of the fact that when a
public servant is convicted of a corruption charge, apart from the trauma and agony that had been
undergone by him during the period preceding the conviction and the period during which the legal
proceedings were pending that the loss of his job, which is a direct result of the conviction, must be
regarded as one of the components of the punishment that is being meted out to him. Whether, in
addition to this component, further punishment is required is what has been considered by the
Supreme Court in all these three cases. The Supreme Court had scaled down the sentence of
imprisonment and had considered that the award of a fine, though of a relatively heavy amount,
would serve the ends of justice. Similarly, in Criminal Appeal No. 409 of 1982, decided on 18-1-1990
by my brother Daud, J., the Court had, on the same ground, namely delay in the ultimate disposal of
the legal proceedings, reduced the jail sentence to one day rigorous imprisonment and imposed a
heavy fine in its place. It is on the basis of this material and these submissions that Mr. Mohite made
a very strong plea to this Court and pointed out that no useful purpose will be served by
incarcerating Accused No. 1 in jail for two years, but that, on the other hand, he would be harshly
and severely punished even if a heavy fine is imposed on him because it will not be all that easy for
him to raise the money to pay the fine.

22. As far as Accused No. 2 is concerned, Miss Dandekar advanced a similar plea, but, in this case,
she pointed out that Accused No. 2, who was an advocate's clerk all through his life, had even before
the trial stopped doing that work; that he is now aged 65 years and that he is required to live on his
meagre savings in so far as his both children, who are daughters, have married and gone away. It is
also pleaded that the illness of the wife of Accused No. 2 should be taken into account by this Court
as a mitigating factor while imposing punishment.

23. Mr. Lambay, the learned Special Public Prosecutor, has made a submission of some consequence
when he pointed out that this case is virtually in the category of the rarest of the rare cases where it
has been possible for the law enforcing machinery, thanks to the high integrity and courage and
honesty displayed by the two judicial officers which qualities are admirable and require to be
commended, that a case of the present type has not only been detected but the Accused have been
put on trial and that the Prosecution has succeeded in recording a conviction. Mr. Lambay
submitted that it is a tragedy of the times that some members of the Bar have been abusing their
position by collecting money in the names of judicial officers, thereby blackening the name of the
judiciary without the Judges being aware of what has happened. Mr. Lambey, therefore, submitted
that even if in one of the solitary cases when such a crime has been detected, established and the
Accused brought to book, this Court under the guise of showing mercy and leniency were to award a
light sentence that it would unfortunately result as an encouragement and even embolden lawyers




and litigants to indulge in the atrocious and obnoxious practices rather than act as a deterrent. Mr.
Lambay submits that the consequences of having indulged in acts of such seriousness are inevitable
in so far as the Accused cannot expect that he would be free to continue as a public servant after he
is found guilty of such offence and that, furthermore, with the pressure on the Court it is
unfortunate and inevitable that a certain amount of time will. elapse before the disposal of the case.
Mr. Lambay has gone to the extent of submitting that often times the Accused themselves dilate and
protract the earlier proceedings in order to canvass a ground in the ultimate that the proceedings
dragged on for several years and, therefore, this is an extenuating circumstance. In the present case,
however, there is no evidence that the Accused had done anything of that sort. On the contrary, Mr.
Mohite has pointed out that the appeal of 1989 would normally have been disposed of after five or
six years, since the criminal appeals of 1983 and 1984 are now being heard, and that it was Accused
No. 1 himself who insisted on taking up the matter out of turn. In substance, what Mr. Lambay has
submitted is that the punishment awarded should be in consonance with the offence that has been
established and that as far as the public mind is concerned that a message should go out loud and
clear from this Court to all those who indulge in this type of practice that the consequences of such
corrupt practice will be extremely grave.

24. Undoubtedly, there is much to be said with regard to both the points of view that have been
canvassed before me. If one were to accept the submissions advanced by the learned Special Public
Prosecutor which, undoubtedly, cannot be faulted with, the inevitable result would be that the
Accused would be meted out with a sentence that may be unduly harsh. The object of punishment is
not a total ruination of an accused person. Even a deterrent punishment is required to be meted out
in keeping with well-set principles of sentencing that are now crystallised. These principles do
embody the dictum that the Court has to take a total view of the punishment that is being meted out
and in a case where the punishment is required to be relatively harsh and heavy that the Court must
apply those principles. Having regard to the station in life of the two Accused and the position in
which they will be placed, both economically and socially, by virtue of the dismissal of their appeals,
the solitary issue, to my mind, that would serve the ends of justice would be the question as to what
additional punishment is required to be awarded to Accused No. 1 and Accused No. 2. I do not share
the view that if the Accused were to incarcerate in prison for two years that it would in any way act
as a heavier deterrent than if a heavy fine were to be imposed on him. On the contrary, to my mind,
where the object of an offence was essentially directed at the making of money, if the law Courts
were to clearly indicate that not only the illegal gains but much more than the amount in question
will be taken away from those who indulge in such offences, in my view the ends of justice will be
adequately served.

25. As far as Accused No. 2 is concerned, though there is a conspiracy charge and though he stands
convicted of it, there is considerable substance in the argument advanced by Miss Dandekar that the
role played by accused No. 2 had been a subsidiary or a lesser one. He was a mere advocate's clerk
who had taken Sakhalchand and Shantilal to Accused No. 1 and who had merely remained present
right through the subsequent operation and it is quite clear from the manner in which everything
happened that Accused No. 2 had very little to do with it and even less to gain. He is an old man
aged 65 years and, therefore, to my mind, the quantum of punishment in his case will have to be
considerably lowered down.





26. The conviction of Accused Nos. 1 and 2, who are the present Appellants under Ss. 162, 163, 165A,
420 read with section 120B of the Indian Penal Code and under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section
5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, are confirmed. The sentence of two years' rigorous
imprisonment and fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default, rigorous imprisonment for six months imposed on
Accused No. 1 by the learned Special Judge is set aside and in its place Accused No. 1 is sentenced to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for one day and to pay a fine in the sum of Rs. 35,000/-, in default, to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months.

27. The sentence imposed on Accused No. 2 of rigorous imprisonment for two years and fine of Rs.
1,000/-, in default, rigorous imprisonment for six months imposed on him by the learned Special
Judge is set aside and in its place Accused No. 2 is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
one day and to pay a fine in the sum of Rs. 10,000/-, in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
six months. Having regard to the fact that the fines imposed on both the Accused are relatively
heavy, at the request of their learned Counsel Accused Nos. 1 and 2 - the Appellants in the two
appeals, are granted a period of four months within which to deposit the fines in the Trial Court. The
bail bonds of Accused Nos. 1 and 2 - the Appellants in the two appeals, shall stand cancelled on the
expiry of this period. The Criminal Appeals stand dismissed accordingly.

28. The fees payable to Mr. Lambay, the learned Special Public Prosecutor who had appeared in this
case having regard to the fact that the record of this case is extremely voluminous and having regard
to the fact that the learned Special Public Prosecutor has done an excellent job for the State, shall be
calculated at the rate of Rs. 1,500/- per day. Though I have quantified the fees payable at a figure
considerably lower than the fees prescribed for Special Counsel by the State of Maharashtra, it is
brought to my notice that the ceiling as far as the per day fees for a Special Counsel are concerned
are Rs. 5,000/- per day and it is this ceiling that shall apply while computing the payment of fees to
Mr. Lambay in the present set of appeals.

29. Mr. Lambay, the learned Special Public Prosecutor, has pointed out to the Court that the modus
operandi which is the subject-matter of the present appeal, namely, instances of lawyers and clerks
collecting money from litigants on the pretext of influencing Judges is not uncommon around the
law Courts and that this is one of the rare instances when the culprits have been brought to book. He
submitted that this case should be brought to the notice of the Bar Council in the hope that special
measures will be devised to combat and stamp out such unclean and unhealthy practices. This
request, to my mind, deserves to be acted upon as this Court cannot turn a blind eye to this grave
situation.

30. As indicated by me earlier, this case presents one of the rarest instances wherein a heinous and
corrupt practice which threatens to pollute and defile the working of the institutions of justice has
not only been detected but brought into sharp focus. It also belies the impression that the problem is
difficult to tackle because it has been demonstrated that both litigants and lawyers are quite willing
to come forward in cases where the complaints are acted upon. It would, therefore, be appropriate in
such a situation for the Court to take a serious note of what has happened and also of what has been
pointed out by the learned Special Public Prosecutor, namely, the fact that effective steps and
counter-checks be devised to combat either the repetition or continuance of such practices. Even at




the expense of this Court adopting a slightly unconventional procedure, the situation is serious
enough to deserve such steps. To my mind, it would be advisable that the Bar Council of
Maharashtra, which is the body set up under the Advocates' Act to enquire into and punish acts of
misconduct, be directed to devise adequate measures to prevent the recurrence or continuation of
any instance of advocates collecting money in the name of judicial officers or varied forms of such
dishonest practices. The Bar Council must seriously work in conjunction with all the Bar
Associations in the State whose co-operation it can insist upon.

31. The Registrar is accordingly directed to forward a copy of this judgment to the Secretary, Bar
Council of Maharashtra, with a request that the case be placed before the Bar Council. The Bar
Council should seriously consider a practical and effective line of action to combat and eliminate
such rackets and should, as a deterrent, simultaneously take stringent disciplinary action against
any advocates found indulging in this racket. For this purpose, a copy of the judgment shall also be
forwarded to all the District Judges and to the Principal Judge of the City Civil Court at Bombay
with a direction that the same be brought to the notice of the Bar Associations who, in their turn,
should inform the litigants that all instances of Advocates and Advocates' clerks, staff members of
the Courts who claim to be contactmen and who offer to interfere in any manner with the course of
judicial proceedings should be brought to the notice of the Bar Council and the concerned judicial
authorities. These steps should act as a starter in combating such clandestine activities which
urgently require to be checked before the virus has a chance of reaching epidemic proportions.

32. Appeals dismissed.



