
Appellants: The Chairman, Railway Board and Ors. 
Vs.

Respondent: Chandrima Das and Ors.


 

JUDGMENT


1. Leave granted,

2 . Mrs.  Chandrima  Das,  a  practicing  advocate  of  the  Calcutta  High  Court,  filed  a
petition  under  Article  226  of  the  Constitution  against  the  Chairman,  Railway  Board;
General  Manager,  Eastern  Railway;  Divisional  Railway  Manager,  Howrah  Division;
Chief Commercial Manager, Eastern Railway; State of West Bengal through the Chief
Secretary,  Home  Secretary  Government  of  West  Bengal,  Superintendent  of  Police
(Railways),  Howrah;  Superintendent  of  Police,  Howrah;  Director  General  of  Police,
West  Bengal  and  many  other  Officers  including  the  Deputy  High  Commissioner,
Republic of Bangladesh; claiming compensation for the victim, Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon,
a  Bangladeshi  national  who  was  gang-raped  by  many  including  employees  of  the
Railways in a room at Yatri Niwas at Howrah Station of the Eastern Railway regarding
which  G.R.P.S.  Case  No.  19/98  was  registered  on  27th  February,  1998.  Mrs.
Chandrima  Das  also  claimed  several  other  reliefs  including  a  direction  to  the
respondents to eradicate anti-social and criminal activities at Howrah Railway Station.

3. The facts as noticed by the High Court in the impugned judgment are as follows:

Respondents Railways and the Union of India have admitted that amongst the
main  accused  you  are  employees  of  the  railways  and  if  the  prosecution
version  is  proved  in  accordance  with  law,  they  are  perpetrators  of  the
heinous  crime  of  gang  rape  repeatedly  committed  upon  the  hapless  victim
Hanufa  Khatun.  It is not in dispute that  Hanufa came from  Bangladesh.  She
at the relevant time was the elected representative of the  Union  Board.  She
arrived  at  Howrah  Railway  Station  on  26th  February,  1998  at  about  14.00
hours  to  avail  Jodhpur  Express  at  23.00  hours  for  paying  a  visit  to  Ajmer
Sharif.  With  that  intent  in  mind,  she  arrived  at  Calcutta  on  24th  February,

                                                                        

1998  and  stayed  at  a  hotel  at  10,  Sudder  Street,  Police  Station  Taltola  and
came  to  Howrah  Station  on  the  date  and  time  aforementioned.  She  had,
however, a wait listed ticket and so she approached a Train Ticket Examiner
at  the  Station  for  confirmation  of  berth  against  her  ticket.  The  Train  Ticket
Examiner  asked"  her  to  wait  in  the  Ladies  Waiting  room.  She  accordingly
came to the ladies waiting room and rested there.

At  about  17.00  hours  on  26th  February,  1998  two  unknown  persons  (later
identified  as  one  Ashoka  Singh,  a  tout  who  posed  himself  as  a  very
influential person of the Railway and Siya Ram Singh a railway ticket broker
having good acquaintance with some of the Railway Staff of Howrah Station)
approached  her,  took  her  ticket  and  returned  the  same  after  confirming
reservation  in  Coach  No.  S-3  (Berth  No.  17)  of  Jodhpur  Express.  At  about
20.00 hours Siya Ram Singh came again to her with a boy named Kashi and
told her to accompany the boy to a restaurant if she wanted to have food for
the  night.  Accordingly  at  about  2]  ,00  hours  she  went  to  a  nearby  eating
house with Kashi and had her meal there. Soon after she had taken her meal,
she  vomited  and  came  back  to  the  Ladies  Waiting  room.  At  about  21.00
hours  Ashoke  Singh  along  with  Rafl  Ahmed  a  Parcel  Supervisor  at  Howrah
Station came to the Ladies Niwas before boarding the train. She appeared to
have  some  doubt  initially  but  on  being  certified  by  the  lady  attendants
engaged  on  duty  at  the  Ladies  Waiting  Room  about  their  credentials  she
accompanied  them  to  Yatri  Niwas.  Sitaram  Singh,  a  Khalasi  of  Electric
Department of  Howrah  Station joined them on way to  Yatri  Niwas.  She was
taken to room No. 102 on the first floor of Yatri Niwas. The room was booked
in the name of Ashoke Singh against Railway Card Pass No. 3638 since 25th
February,  1998.  In  room  No.  102  two  other  persons  viz.  one  Lalan  Singh,
Parcel  Clerk  of  Howrah  Railway  Station  and  Awdesh  Singh,  Parcel  Clearing
Agent were waiting. Hanufa Khatun suspected something amiss when Ashoke
Singh forced her into the room. Awdesh Singh bolted the room from outside
and  stood  on  guard  outside  the  room.  The  remaining  four  persons  viz.
Ashoke, Lalan, Raft and Sitaram took liquor inside the room and also forcibly
compelled  her  to  consume  liquor.  All  the  four  persons  who  were  present
inside the room brutally violated, Hanufa Khatun, it is said, was in a state of
.shock  and  daze.  When  she  could  recover  she  managed  to  escape  from  the
room of Yatri Niwas and came back to the platform where again she met Siya
Ram  Singh  and  found  him  talking  to  Ashoke  Singh.  Seeing  her  plight  Siya
Ram  Singh pretended to be her savior and also abused and slapped  Ashoke
Singh.  Since  it  was  well  past  midnight  and  Jodhpur  Express  had  already
departed,  Siya  Ram  requested  Hanufa  Khatoon  to  accompany  him  to  his
residence to rest for the night with his wife and children. He assured her to
help  entrain  Poorva  Express  on  the  following  morning.  Thereafter  Siyaram
accompanied by  Ram  Samiram  Sharma,  a  friend  of  Siyaram  took  her  to  the
rented  fiat  of  Ram  Samiram  Sharma  at  66,  Pathuriaghata  Street,  Police
Station  Jorabagan,  Calcutta.  There  Siyaram  raped  Hanufa  and  when  she
protested  and  resisted  violently  Siyaram  and  Ram  Samiran  Sharma  gagged
her mouth and nostrils intending to kill her as a result Hanufa bled profusely.
On being informed by the landlord of the building following the hue and cry
raised by Hanufa Khatun. she was rescued by Jorabagan Police.

4. It was on the basis of the above facts that the High Court had awarded a sum of
Rs, 10 lacs as compensation for Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon as the High Court was of the
opinion that the rape was committed at the building (Rail  Yatri  Niwas) belonging to

the Railways and was perpetrated by the Railway employees.

5 . In  the  present  appeal,  we  are  not  concerned  with  many  directions  issued  by  the
High Court. The only question argued before us was that the Railways would not be
liable to pay compensation to Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon who was a foreigner and was not
an Indian national. It is also contended that commission of the offence by the person
concerned  would  not  make  the  Railway  or  the  Union  of  India  liable  to  pay
compensation  to  the  victim  of  the  offence.  It  is  contended  that  since  it  was  the
individual act of those persons, they alone would be prosecuted and on being found
guilty  would  be  punished  and  may  also  be  liable  to  pay  fine  or  compensation,  but
having regard to the facts of this case, the Railways, or, for that matter, the Union of
India  would  not  even  be  vicariously  liable.  It  is  also  contended  that  for  claiming
damages for the offence perpetrated on Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon, the remedy lay in the
domain  of  Private  Law  and  not  under  Public  Law  and,  therefore,  no  compensation
could have been legally awarded by the High Court in a proceeding under Article 226
of the Constitution and, that too, at the instance of a practicing advocate who, in no
way, was concerned or connected with the victim.

6 . We  may  first  dispose  of  the  contention  raised  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  that
proceedings  under  Article  226  of  the  Constitution  could  not  have  been  legally
initiated  for  claiming  damages  from  the  Railways  for  the  offence  of  rape  committed
on  Smt,  Hanuffa  Khatoon  and  that  Smt.  Hanuffa  Khatoon  herself  should  have
approached  the  Court  in  the  realm  of  Private  Law  so  that  all  the  questions  of  fact
could  have  been  considered  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the  parties  to
record  a  finding  whether  all  the  ingredients  of  the  commission  of  tort  against  the
person of Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon were made out, so as to be entitled to the relief of
damages.  We  may  also  consider  the  question  of  locus  standi  as  it  is  contended  on
behalf of the appellants that Mrs. Chandrima Das, who is a practicing Advocate of the
High Court of Calcutta, could not have legally instituted these proceedings.

7 . The  distinction  between  "Public  Law"  and  "Private  Law"  was  considered  by  a
Three-Judge Bench of this Court in Common Cause. A Regd. Society v. Union of India
MANU/SC/0437/1999  :  [1999]3SCR1279  ,  in  which  it  was,  inter  alia,  observed  as
under (Paras 38 and 39 of AIR):

Under  Article  226  of  the  Constitution,  the  High  Court  has  been  given  the
power and jurisdiction to issue appropriate Writs in the nature of Mandamus,
Certiorari, Prohibition, Quo-Warranto and Habeas Corpus for the enforcement
of  Fundamental  Rights  or  for  any  other  purpose.  Thus,  the  High  Court  has
jurisdiction  not  only  to  grant  relief  for  the  enforcement  of  Fundamental
Rights but also for "any other purpose" which would include the enforcement
of public duties by public bodies. So also the Supreme Court under Article 32
has  the  jurisdiction  to  issue  prerogative  writs  for  the  enforcement  of
Fundamental Rights guaranteed to a citizen under the Constitution.

Essentially, under public law, it is the dispute between the citizen or a group
of citizens on the one hand and the State or other public bodies on the other,
which is resolved. This is done to maintain the rule of law and to prevent the
State or the public bodies from acting in an arbitrary manner or in violation
of that rule. The exercise of constitutional powers by the High Court and the
Supreme  Court  under  Article  226  or  32  has  been  categorised  as  power  of
"judicial  review".  Every  executive  or  administrative  action  of  the  State  or
other  statutory  or  public  bodies  is  open  to  judicial  scrutiny  and  the  High

                                                                           

Court or the  Supreme  Court can, in exercise of the power of judicial review
under  the  Constitution,  quash  the  executive  action  or  decision  which  is
contrary  to  law  or  Is  violative  of  Fundamental  Rights  guaranteed  by  the
Constitution.  With  the  expanding  horizon  of  Article  14  read  with  other
Articles dealing with Fundamental Rights, every executive action of the Govt.
or  other  public  bodies,  including  Instrumentalities  of  the  Govt.,  or  those
which can be legally treated as "Authority" within the meaning of Article 12,
if  arbitrary,  unreasonable  or  contrary  to  law,  is  now  amenable  to  the  writ
jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  32  or  the  High  Courts  under  Article
226  and  can  be  validly  scrutinised  on  the  touchstone  of  the  Constitutional
mandates.

8. The earlier decision, namely, Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Escorts Limited
MANU/SC/0015/1985 : 1986(8)ECC189 , in which it was observed as under:

Broadly  speaking,  the  Court  will  examine  actions  of  State  if  they  pertain  to
the public law domain and refrain from examining them if they pertain to the
private  law  field.  The  difficulty  will  lie  in  demarcating  the  frontier  between
the public law domain and the private law field. It is impossible to draw the
line with precision and we do not want to attempt it.  The question must be
decided  in  each  case  with  reference  to  the  particular  action,  the  activity  in
which  the  State  or  the  instrumentality  of  the  State  is  engaged  when
performing  the  action,  the  public  law  or  private  law  character  of  the  action
and a host of other relevant circumstances was relied upon.

9. Various aspects of the Public Law field were considered. It was found that though
initially a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution relating to contractual matters
was held not to lie, the law underwent a change by subsequent decisions and it was
noticed that even though the petition may relate essentially to a contractual matter, it
would still be amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the  High  Court under  Article 226.
The Public Law remedies have also been extended to the realm of tort. This Court, in
its various decisions, has entertained petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution on
a  number  of  occasions  and  has  awarded  compensation  to  the  petitioners  who  had
suffered  personal  injuries  at  the  hands  of  the  officers  of  the  Govt.  The  causing  of
injuries, which amounted to tortious act, was compensated by this Court in many of
its  decisions  beginning  from  Rudul  Sah  v.  State  of  Bihar  MANU/SC/0380/1983  :
1983CriLJ1644 
.  [See  also  Bhim  Singh  v.  State  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir
MANU/SC/0064/1985 : 1986CriLJ192 ; People's Union for Democratic Rights v. State
of Bihar MANU/SC/0104/1986 : 1987CriLJ528 ; People's Union for Democratic Rights
Thru. 
Police  Headquarters
MANU/SC/0409/1989  :  (1989)4SCC730  ;  Saheli,  A  Women's  Resources  center  v.
Commissioner  of  Police,  Delhi  MANU/SC/0478/1989  :  AIR1990SC513  ;  Arvinder
Singh Bagga v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0025/1995 : AIR1995SC117 ; P. Rathinam v.
Union of India ; In Re: Death of Sawinder Singh Grower (2); Inder Singh v. State of
Punjab  MANU/SC/0380/1995  :  1995CriLJ3235  ;  D.K.  Basu  v.  State  of  West  Bengal
MANU/SC/0157/1997 : 1997CriLJ743 .

Police  Commissioner,  Delhi 

Its  Secy. 

v. 

10. In  cases  relating  to  custodial  deaths  and  those  relating  to  medical  negligence,
this Court awarded compensation under Public Law domain in Nilabati Behera v. State
of  Orissa  MANU/SC/0307/1993  :  1993CriLJ2899  ;  State  of  M.P.  v.  Shyam  Sunder
Trivedi MANU/SC/0722/1995 : (1995)4SCC262 ; People's Union for Civil Liberties v.
Union  of  India  MANU/SC/0274/1997  :  AIR1997SC1203  and  Kaushalya  v.  State  of
Punjab (1996)  7  SCALE  (SP)  13;  Supreme  Court  Legal  Aid  Committee  v.  State  of

                                                                         

Bihar  MANU/SC/0604/1991  :  (1991)3SCC482  ;  Dr.  Jacob  George  v.  State  of  Kerala
MANU/SC/0684/1994 : 1994CriLJ3851 ; PaschimBanga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State
of  West  Bengal  MANU/SC/0611/1996  :  AIR1996SC2426  and  Mrs.  Manju  Bhatia  v.
N.D.M.C. MANU/SC/1235/1997 : (1997)6SCC370 :

11. Having regard to what has been stated above, the contention that  Smt.  Hanuffa
Khatoon should have approached the Civil Court for damages and the matter should
not have been considered in a petition under  Article 226 of the  Constitution, cannot
be  accepted.  Where  public  functionaries  are  involved  and  the  matter  relates  to  the
violation  of  Fundamental  Rights  or  the  enforcement  of  public  duties,  the  remedy
would  still  be  available  under  the  Public  Law  notwithstanding  that  a  suit  could  be
filed for damages under Private Law.

12. In the instant case, it is not a mere matter of violation of an ordinary right of a
person  but  the  violation  of  Fundamental  Rights  which  is  involved.  Smt.  Hanuffa
Khatoon was a victim of rape.  This  Court in  Bodhisattwa v.  Ms.  Subhra  Chakraborty
MANU/SC/0245/1996  :  AIR1996SC922  has  held  "rape"  as  an  offence  which  is
violative  of  the  Fundamental  Right  of  a  person  guaranteed  under  Article  21  of  the
Constitution. The Court observed as under (Para 10 of AIR):

Rape is a crime not only against the person of a woman, it is a crime against
the entire society. It destroys the entire psychology of a woman and pushes
her into deep emotional crisis. Rape is therefore the most hated crime. It is a
crime  against  basic  human  rights  and  is  violative  of  the  victims  most
cherished right, namely, right to life which includes right to live with human
dignity contained in Article 21.

13. Rejecting, therefore, the contention of the learned Counsel for the appellants that
the  petition  under  Public  Law  was  not  maintainable,  we  now  proceed  to  his  next
contention  relating  to  the  locus  standi  of  respondent,  Mrs.  Chandrima  Das,  in  filing
the petition.

1 4 . The  main  contention  of  the  learned  Counsel  for  the  appellants  is  that  Mrs.
Chandrima Das was only a practicing advocate of the Calcutta High Court and was, in
no way, connected or related to the victim, Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon and, therefore, she
could not have filed a petition under Article 226 for damages or compensation being
awarded  to  Smt.  Hanuffa  Khatoon  on  account  of  the  rape  committed  on  her.  This
contention is based on a misconception. Learned Counsel for the appellants is under
the  impression  that  the  petition  filed  before  the  Calcutta  High  Court  was  only  a
petition for damages or compensation for Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon. As a matter of fact,
the  reliefs  which  were  claimed  in  the  petition  included  the  relief  for  compensation.
But many other reliefs as, for example, relief for eradicating anti-social and criminal
activities  of  various  kinds  at  Howrah  Railway  Station  were  also  claimed.  The  true
nature of the petition, therefore, was that of a petition filed in public interest.

15. The  existence  of  a  legal  right,  no  doubt,  is  the  foundation  for  a  petition  under
Article 226 and a bare interest, may be of a minimum nature, may give locus stand!
to a person to file a Writ Petition, but the concept of "Locus Standi" has undergone a
sea  change,  as  we  shall  presently  notice.  In  Dr.  Satyanarayana  Sinha  v.  S.  Lal  and
Co. Pvt. Ltd. MANU/SC/0039/1973 : [1974]1SCR615 , it was held that the foundation
for exercising jurisdiction under Article 32 or Article 226 is ordinarily the personal or
individual  right  of  the  petitioner  himself.  In  writs  like  Habeas  Corpus  and  Quo
Warranto, the rule has been relaxed and modified.

                                                                             

16. In S. P. Gupta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0080/1981 : [1982]2SCR365 , the law
relating to locus stand! was explained so as to give a wider meaning to the phrase.
This Court laid down that "practicing lawyers have undoubtedly a vital interest in the
independence  of  the  judiciary;  they  would  certainly  be  interested  in  challenging  the
validity  or  constitutionality  of  an  action  taken  by  the  State  or  any  public  authority
which  has  the  effect  of  impairing  the  independence  of  the  judiciary."  It  was  further
observed  that  "lawyer's  profession  was  an  essential  and  integral  part  of  the  judicial
system; they could figuratively be described as priests in the temple of justice. They
have, therefore, a special interest in preserving the integrity and independence of the
judicial  system;  they  are  equal  partners  with  the  Judges  in  the  administration  of
justice.  The  lawyers,  either  in  their  individual  capacity  or  as  representing  some
Lawyers' Associations have the locus standi to challenge the circular letter addressed
by  the  Union  Law  Minister  to  the  Governors  and  Chief  Ministers  directing  that  one
third of the Judges of the High Court should, as far as possible, be from outside the
State.

1 7 . In  the  context  of  Public  Interest  Litigation,  however,  the  Court  in  its  various
judgments has given widest amplitude and meaning to the concept of locus standi. In
People's  Union  for  Democratic  Rights  v.  Union  of  India  MANU/SC/0038/1982  :
(1982)IILLJ454SC , it was laid down that Public Interest Litigation could be initiated
not only by filing formal petitions in the High Court but even by sending letters and
telegrams so as to provide easy access to Court. (See also Bandhua Mukti Morcha v.
Union of India MANU/SC/0051/1983 : [1984]2SCR67 and State of Himachal Pradesh
v.  Student's  Parent  Medical  College,  Shimla  MANU/SC/0046/1985  :  [1985]3SCR676
on  the  right  to  approach  the  Court  in  the  realm  of  Public  Interest  Litigation).  In
Bangalore  Medical  Trust  v.  B.S.  Muddappa  MANU/SC/0426/1991  :  [1991]3SCR102  ,
the Court held that the restricted meaning of aggrieved person and narrow outlook of
specific injury has yielded in favour of a broad and wide construction in the wake of
Public  Interest  Litigation.  The  Court  further  observed  that  public-spirited  citizens
having  faith  in  the  rule  of  law  are  rendering  great  social  and  legal  service  by
espousing causes of public nature. They cannot be ignored or overlooked on technical
or  conservative  yardstick  of  the  rule  of  locus  standi  or  absence  of  personal  loss  or
injury. There has, thus, been a spectacular expansion of the concept of locus standi.
The concept is much wider and it takes in its stride anyone who is not a mere "busy-
body".

18. Having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  petition  filed  by  respondent  Mrs.  Chandrima
Das and the relief claimed therein it cannot be doubted that this petition was filed in
public interest which could legally be filed by the respondent and the argument that
she; could not file that petition as there was nothing personal to her involved in that
petition must be rejected.

1 9 . It  was  next  contended  by  the  learned  Counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
appellants, that Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon was a foreign national and, therefore, no relief
under  Public  Law  could  be  granted  to  her  as  there  was  no  violation  of  the
Fundamental  Rights  available  under  the  Constitution.  It  was  con  tended  that  the
Fundamental Rights in Part III of the Constitution are available only to citizens of this
country  and  since  Smt.  Hanuffa  Khatoon  was  a  Bangladeshi  national,  she  cannot
complain  of  the  violation  of  Fundamental  Rights  and  on  that  basis  she  cannot  be
granted any relief. This argument must also fail for two reasons; first, on the ground
of  Domestic  Jurisprudence  based  on  Constitutional  provisions  and  secondly,  on  the
ground of Human Rights Jurisprudence based on the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1948, which has the international recognition as the 'Moral Code of Conduct'

                                                                            

having been adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations.

2 0 . We  will  come  to  the  question  of  Domestic  Jurisprudence  a  little  later  as  we
intend  to  first  consider  the  principles  and  objects  behind  Universal  Declaration  of
Human  Rights,  1948,  as  adopted  and  proclaimed  by  the  United  Nations  General
Assembly  Resolution  of  10th  December,  1948.  The  preamble,  inter  alia,  sets  out  as
under:

Whereas  recognition  of  the  INHERENT  DIGNITY  and  of  the  equal  and
inalienable  rights  of  all  members  of  the  human  family  is  the  foundation  of
freedom, justice and peace in the world.

Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous
acts  which  have  outraged  the  conscience  of  mankind,  and  the  advent  of  a
world in which human beings  shall  enjoy  freedom  of  speech  and  belief  and
freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of
the common people.

Whereas  it  is  essential  to  promote  the  development  of  friendly  relations
between nations.

Whereas the people of the United Nations have in the Charter affirmed their
faith  in  fundamental  human  rights.  IN  THE  DIGNITY  AND  WORTH  OF  THE
HUMAN PERSON AND IN THE EQUAL RIGHTS OF MEN AND WOMEN and have
determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom.

Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-operation
with  the  United  Nations,  the  promotion  of  universal  respect  for  and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedom.

Whereas  a  common  understanding  of  these  rights  and  freedom  is  of  the
greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge.

21. Thereafter, the Declaration sets out, inter alia, in various Articles, the following:

Article  1.-  All  human  beings  are  born  free  and  equal  in  dignity  and  rights.
They  are  endowed  with  reason  and  conscience  and  should  act  towards  one
another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Article 2.- Every one is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this
Declaration,  without  distinction  of  any  kind,  such  as  race,  colour,  sex,
language, religion, political or other opinion, NATIONAL OR SOCIAL ORIGIN,
PROPERTY, BIRTH OR OTHER STATUS.

Furthermore,  NO  DISTINCTION  SHALL  BE  MADE  ON  THE  BASIS  OF  THE
POLITICAL, JURISDICTIONAL OR INTERNATIONAL STATUS OF THE COUNTRY
OR TERRITORY to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust,
non-self governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty.

Article 3.- Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.

Article  5.-  No  one  shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  cruel,  inhuman  or
degrading treatment or punishment.


Article  7.-  All  are  equal  before  the  law  and  are  entitled  without  any
discrimination  to  equal  protection  of  the  law.  All  are  entitled  to  equal
protection  against  any  discrimination  in  violation  of  this  Declaration  and
against any incitement to such discrimination.

Article 9.- No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.

22. Apart from the above, the General Assembly, also while adopting the Declaration
on  the  Elimination  of  Violence  against  Women,  by  its  Resolution  dated  20th
December, 1993, observed in Article 1 that, "violence against women" means any act
of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or
psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or
arbitrary  deprivation  of  liberty,  whether  occurring  in  public  or  in  private  life.  In
Article  2,  it  was  specified  that,  violence  against  women  shall  be  understood  to
encompass, but not be limited to:

(a)  Physical,  sexual  and  psychological  violence  occurring  in  the  family
including battering, sexual abuse of female children in the household, dowry-
related violence, marital rape, female genital mutilation and other traditional
practices  harmful  to  women,  non-spousal  violence  and  violence  related  to
exploitation;

(b)  Physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring within the general
community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intimidation
at work, in educational institutions and elsewhere, trafficking in women and
forced prostitution;

(c)  Physical,  sexual  and  psychological  violence  perpetrated  or  condoned  by
the State, wherever it occurs.

23. In  Article  3,  it  was  specified  that  "women  art:  entitled  to  the  equal  enjoyment
and protection of all human rights, which would include, inter alia:

(a) the right to life,

(b) the right to equality, and

(c) the right to liberty and security of person,

24. The  International  Covenants and  Declarations as adopted by the  United  Nations
have  to  be  respected  by  all  signatory  States  and  the  meaning  given  to  the  above
words in those Declarations and Covenants have to be such as would help in effective
implementation  of  those  Rights.  The  applicability  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of
Human  Rights  and  principles  thereof  may  have  to  be  read,  if  need  be,  into  the
domestic jurisprudence.

25. Lord  Diplock  in  Salomon  v.  Commissioners  of  Customs  and  Excise (1996) 3  All
ER 871 said that there is a, prima facie, presumption that Parliament does not intend
to  act  in  breach  of  international  law.  Including  specific  treaty  obligations.  So  also,
Lords Bridge in Brind v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (1991) 1 All ER
720,  observed  that  it  was  well  settled  that,  in  construing  any  provision  in  domestic
legislation  which  was  ambiguous  in  the  sense  that  it,  was  capable  of  a  meaning
which  either  conforms  to  or  conflicts  with  the  International  Convention,  the  Courts
would  presume  that  Parliament  intended  to  legislate  in  conformity  with  the

                                                                            

Convention and not in conflict with it.

2 6 . The  domestic  application  of  international  human  rights  and  norms  was
considered  by  the  Judicial  Colloquia  (Judges  and  Lawyers)  at  Bangalore  in  1988.  It
was  later  affirmed  by  the  Colloquia  that  it  was  the  vital  duly  of  an  independent
judiciary to interpret and apply national constitutions in the light of those principles.
Further Colloquia were convened in 1994 at Zimbabwe, in 1996 at Hong Kong and in
1997  at  Guyana  and  In  all  those  Colloquia,  the  question  of  domestic  application  of
international  and  regional  human  rights  specially  in  relation  to  woman,  was
considered. The Zimbabwe Declaration 1994, inter alia, stated:

Judges  and  lawyers  have  duty  to  familiarize  themselves  with  the  growing
international  jurisprudence  of  human  rights  and  particularly  with  the
expanding  material  on  the  protection  and  promotion  of  the  human  rights  of
women.

27. But this situation may not really arise in our country.

28. Our Constitution guarantees all the basic and fundamental human rights set out
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, to its citizens and other persons.
The  chapter  dealing  with  the  Fundamental  Rights  is  contained  in  Part  III  of  the
Constitution. The purpose of this part is to safeguard the basic human rights from the
vicissitudes  of  political  controversy  and  to  place  them  beyond  the  reach  of  the
political parties who, by virtue of their majority, may come to form the Govt. at the
center or in the State.

29. The  Fundamental  Rights  are  available  to  all  the  "Citizens"  of  the  country  but  a
few  of  them  are  also  available  to  "persons".  While  Article  14,  which  guarantees
equality  before  law  or  the  equal  protection  of  laws  within  the  territory  of  India,  is
applicable  to  "person"  which  would  also  include  the  "citizen"  of  the  country  and
"non-citizen"  both,  Article  15  speaks  only  of  "citizen"  and  it  is  specifically  provided
therein that there shall be no discrimination against any "citizen" on the ground only
of  religion,  race,  caste,  sex,  place  of  birth  or  any  of  them  nor  shall  any  citizen  be
subjected to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to access to
shops,  public  restaurants,  hostel  and  places  of  public  entertainment,  or  the  use  of
wells,  tanks,  bathing  ghats,  roads  and  place  of  public  resort  on  the  aforesaid
grounds.  Fundamental  Rights guaranteed under  Article 15 is, therefore, restricted to
"citizen".  So  also,  Article  16  which  guarantees  equality  of  opportunity  in  matters  of
public employment is applicable only to "citizens". The Fundamental Rights contained
in  Article  19,  which  contains  the  right  to  "Basic  Freedoms",  namely,  freedom  of
speech  and  expression;  freedom  to  assemble  peaceably  and  without  arms;  freedom
to  form  associations  or  unions;  freedom  to  move  freely  throughout  the  territory  of
India; freedom to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India and freedom to
practice  any  profession,  or  to  carry  on  any  occupation,  trade  or  business,  are
available only to "citizens" of the country.

30. The word "citizen" in Article 19 has not been used in a sense different from that
In which it has been used in Part II of the Constitution dealing with "citizenship" [See
State  Trading  Corporation  of 
v.  Commercial  Tax  Officer
MANU/SC/0038/1963  :  [1964]4SCR99  ).  It  has  also  been  held  in  this  case  that  the
words "all citizens" have been deliberately used to keep out all "non-citizens" which
would  include  "aliens".  It  was  laid  down  in  Hans  Muller  of  Nurenburg  v.
Superintendent, Presidency Jail, Calcutta MANU/SC/0074/1955 : 1955CriLJ876 , that

India 

Ltd. 


this Article applies only to "citizens". In another decision in Anwar v. State of J. & K.
MANU/SC/0084/1970 : [1971]1SCR637 , it was held that non-citizen could not claim
Fundamental  Rights  under  Article  19.  In  Naziranbai  v.  State AIR  1957  MB  1  and
Lakshim  Prasad v.  Shiv  Pal  MANU/UP/0080/1974 :  AIR1974All313 , it was held that
Article 19 does not apply to a "foreigner".  The  Calcutta  High  Court in  Sk.  Mohamed
Soleman v. State of West Bengal MANU/WB/0065/1965 : AIR1965Cal312 , held that
Article 19 does not apply to a Commonwealth citizen.

3 1 . In  Anwar  v.  State  of  J.  &  K.  MANU/SC/0084/1970  :  [1971]1SCR637  (already
referred  to  above),  it  was  held  that  the  rights  under  Articles  20,  21  and  22  are
available  not  only  to  "citizens"  but  also  to  "persons"  which  would  include  "non-
citizens".

32. Article  20  guarantees  right  to  protection  in  respect  of  conviction  for  offences.
Article  21  guarantees  right  to  life  and  personal  liberty  while  Article  22  guarantees
right  to  protection  against  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention.  These  are  wholly  in
consonance  with  Article  3,  Article 7  and  Article 9  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of
Human Rights, 1948.

33. The word "LIFE" has also been used prominently in the Universal Declaration of
Human  Rights,  1948.  [See  Article 3  quoted  above].  The  Fundamental  Rights  under
the Constitution are almost in consonance with the Rights contained in the Universal
Declaration of  Human  Rights as also the  Declaration and the  Covenants of  Civil and
Political Rights and the Covenants of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, to which
India is a party having ratified them, as out by this Court in Kubic Darusz v. Union of
India  MANU/SC/0426/1990  :  1990CriLJ796  ,  That  being  so,  since  "LIFE"  is  also
recognised  as  a  basic  human  right  in  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,
1948, it has to have the same meaning and interpretation as has been placed on that
word by this  Court in its various decisions relating to  Article 21 of the  Constitution.
The meaning of the word "life" cannot be narrowed down. According to the tenor of
the language used in  Article 21, it will be available not only to every citizen of this
Country, but also to a "person" who may not be a citizen of the country.

34. Let  us  now  consider  the  meaning  of  the  word  "LIFE"  interpreted  by  this  Court
from  time  to  time.  In  Kharak  Singh  v.  State  of  U.P.  MANU/SC/0085/1962  :
1963CriLJ329 . it was held that the term "life" indicates something more than mere
animal  existence.  [See  also  :  State  of  Maharashtra  v.  Chandrabhan  Tale
MANU/SC/0396/1983  :  (1983)IILLJ256SC  ].  The  inhibitions  contained  in  Article  21
against  its  deprivation  extends  even  to  those  faculties  by  which  life  is  enjoyed.  In
Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. U.O.I. MANU/SC/0051/1983 : [1984]2SCR67 , it was held
that the right to life under  Article 21 means the right to live with dignity, free from
exploitation.  [See  also  :  Maneka  Gandhi  v.  U.O.I.  MANU/SC/0133/1978  :
[1978]2SCR621  and  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Port  of  Bombay  v.  Dilip  Kumar
Raghavendranath Nadkarni MANU/SC/0184/1982 : (1983)ILLJ1SC ].

35. On this principles, even those who are not citizens of this country and come here
merely as tourists or in any other capacity will be entitled to the protection of their
lives in accordance with the Constitutional provisions. They also have a right to "Life"
in this country. Thus, they also have the right to live, so long as they are here, with
human  dignity,  just  as  the  State  is  under  an  obligation  to  protect  the  life  of  every
citizen in this country, so also the  State is under an obligation to protect the life of
the persons who are not citizens.

 
3 6 . The  Rights  guaranteed  under  Part  III  of  the  Constitution  are  not  absolute  in
terms.  They  are  subject  to  reasonable  restrictions  and,  therefore,  in  case  of  non-
citizen  also,  those  Rights  will  be  available  subject  to  such  restrictions  as  may  be
imposed in the interest of the security of the State or other important considerations.
Interest  of  the  Nation  and  security  of  the  State  is  supreme.  Since  1948  when  the
Universal  Declaration  was  adopted  till  this  day,  there  have  been  many  changes  -
political,  social  and  economic  while  terrorism  has  disturbed  the  global  scenario.
Primacy of the interest of  Nation and the security of  State will have to be read into
the  Universal  Declaration  as  also  in  every  Article  dealing  with  Fundamental  Rights,
including Article 21 of the Indian Constitution.

3 7 . It  has  already  been  pointed  out  above  that  this  Court  in  Bodhisatwa'  s  case
(MANU/SC/0245/1996  :  AIR1996SC922  )  (supra)  has  already  held  that  "rape"
amounts to violation of the Fundamental Right guaranteed to a woman under Article
21 of the Constitution.

38. Now,  Smt.  Hanuffa  Khatoon , who was not the citizen of this country but came
here  as  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  was,  nevertheless,  entitled  to  all  the  constitutional
rights available to a citizen so far as "Right to Life" was concerned. She was entitled
to  be  treated  with  dignity  and  was  also  entitled  to  the  protection  of  her  person  as
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. As a national of another country, she
could  not  be  subjected  to  a  treatment  which  was  below  dignity  nor  could  she  be
subjected  to  physical  violence  at  the  hands  of  Govt.  employees  who  outraged  her
modesty. The right available to her under Article 21 was thus violated. Consequently,
the  State  was  under  the  Constitutional  liability  to  pay  compensation  to  her.  The
judgment passed by the Calcutta High Court, therefore, allowing compensation to her
for having been gang raped, cannot be said to suffer from any infirmity.

39. Learned Counsel for the appellants then contended that the Central Govt. cannot
be held vicariously liable for the offence of rape committed by the employees of the
Railways. It was contended that the liability under the Law of Torts would arise only
when  the  act  complained  of  was  performed  in  the  course  of  official  duty  and  since
rape cannot be said to be an official act, the Central Govt. would not be liable even
under the Law of Torts. The argument is wholly bad and is contrary to the law settled
by this Court on the question of vicarious liability in its various decisions.

40. In State of Rajasthan v. Mst. Vidhyawati MANU/SC/0025/1962 : AIR1962SC933 ,
it  was  held  that  the  Govt.  will  be  vicariously  liable  for  the  tortious  act  of  its
employees. This was a case where a claim for damages was made by the heirs of a
person  who  died  in  an  accident  caused  by  the  negligence  of  the  driver  of  a  Govt.
vehicle. Reference may also be made to the decisions of this Court in State of Gujarat
v.  Memon  Mahomed  Haji  Hasan  MANU/SC/0016/1967  :  [1967]3SCR938 and  Smt.
Basava  Kom  Dyamagouda  Patil  v.  State  of  Mysore  MANU/SC/0675/1977  :
1977CriLJ1141 .  These principles were reiterated in  N.  Nagendra  Rao &  Co. v.  State
of A.P. MANU/SC/0530/1994 : AIR1994SC2663 ) and again in State of Maharashtra v.
Kanchanmala Vijaysingh Shirke MANU/SC/0781/1995 : AIR1995SC2499 .

41. Reliance placed by the counsel for the appellants on the decision of this Court in
Kasturi Lal Ralia Ram Jain v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0086/1964 : (1966)IILLJ583SC
cannot  help  him  as  this  decision  has  not  been  followed  by  this  Court  in  the
subsequent decisions, including the decisions in State of Gujarat v. Memon Mahomed
Haji  Hasan  MANU/SC/0016/1967 
[1967]3SCR938 and  Smt.  Basava  Kom
Dayamogouda Patil v. State of Mysore MANU/SC/0675/1977 : 1977CriLJ1141 (supra)

: 

                                                                            

. The decision in Kasturi Lal's case was also severally criticised by Mr. Seervrai in his
prestigious book - Constitutional Law of India. A Three Judge Bench of this Court in
Common  Cause,  a  Regd.  Society  v.  Union  of  India  MANU/SC/0437/1999  :
[1999]3SCR1279  also  did  not  follow  the  decision  in  Kasturi  Lal's  case  (supra)  arid
observed that the efficacy of this decision as a binding precedent has been eroded.

4 2 . The  theory  of  Sovereign  power  which  was  propounded  in  Kasturi  Lal's  case
(MANU/SC/0086/1964  :  (1966)IILLJ583SC  )  has  yielded  to  new  theories  and  is  no
longer available in a welfare State. It may be pointed out that functions of the Govt.
in  a  welfare  State  are  manifold,  all  of  which  cannot  be  said  to  be  the  activities
relating to exercise of Sovereign powers. The functions of the State not only relate to
the defence of the country or the administration of Justice, but they extend to many
other spheres as, for example education, commercial, social, economic , political and
even marital. These activities cannot be said to be related to Sovereign power.

43. Running of Railways is a commercial activity. Establishing Yatri Niwas at various
Railway Stations to provide lodging and boarding facilities to passengers on payment
of charges is a part of the commercial activity of the Union of India and this activity
cannot be equated with the exercise of Sovereign power. The employees of the Union
of  India  who  are  deputed  to  run  the  Railways  and  to  manage  the  establishment,
including the Railway Stations and Yatri Niwas, are essential components of the Govt.
machinery  which  carriage  on  the  commercial  activity.  If  any  of  such  employees
commits  an  act  of  tort,  the  Union  Govt.,  of  which  they  are  the  employees,  can,
subject  to  other  legal  requirements  being  satisfied,  be  held  vicariously  liable  in
damages  to  the  person  wronged  by  those  employees.  Kasturi  Lal's  decision,
(MANU/SC/0086/1964  :  (1966)IILLJ583SC  )  ,  therefore,  cannot  be  pressed  in  aid.
Moreover,  we  are  dealing  with  this  case  under  Public  Law  domain  and  not  in  a  suit
instituted  under  Private  Law  domain  against  persons  who,  utilising  their  official
position,  got  a  room  in  the  Yatri  Niwas  booked  in  their  own  name  where  the  act
complained of was committed.

44. No  other  point  was  raised  before  us.  The  appeal  having  no  merit  is  dismissed
with the observation that the amount of compensation shall be made over to the High
Commissioner  for  Bangladesh  in  India  for  payment  to  the  victim,  Smt.  Hanuffa
Khatoon. The payment to the High Commissioner shall be made within three months.
There will be no order as to costs.

                                                                            

